## **The Choir of Flowers**
##### **(Beauty as Episteme)**

Perhaps the reader will follow us along with a philosophical experiment of sorts. Let’s begin by repeating: anything which is able to make predictions, to the extent that its predictions better anticipate reality, increasingly approximates the ideal of a Bayesian reasoner.

At Harmless, we noticed that the output of neural networks and their resulting effects on society best is predicted as an acceleration and intensification of existing trends. People have long been complaining about the content on Netflix being algorithmically generated, before this actually became possible. The flattening of style that will inevitably happen with generative LLMs being widely applied has already been well underway in the past decade, with the flattening of style in all fields, interfaces, architecture, design, and speech. The cheapness of artistic production flattening art and making its economic viability difficult has already been felt in music for instance, with artists making music for the Spotify playlist and not for the LP, leading to the rapid overturn in popularity and a post-fame era in popular art.

Briefly, we can describe a Bayesian Neural Network as such: a Bayesian Neural Network is a set of nodes, each tasked with declaring a certain probability over the same truth-claim; this could be: is a given image a picture of a cat or a dog, is the enemy planning to attack tomorrow, is AI going to kill everybody in the next decade, etc. (Technically, in a Bayesian Neural Network each node forwards a distribution over all possible probabilities; this is actually what differentiates it from a standard neural network.) In the lowest level of the Bayesian Neural Network, the nodes each pay attention to a specific piece of the evidence at hand and use it to establish their own estimation of the probability. It is like the parable of the blind men and the elephant: one node looks at the ears, one node looks at the eyes, one node looks at the feet, and each gives its estimation of whether it is looking at a dog or a cat. Intermediate levels aggregate predictions from lower-level nodes, they are like managers who collect business reports from their employees with some skepticism, noting down which ones are underperforming. The final layer is like a council of wise men who receive all the reports and usher forth an ultimate judgment.

This led us to wonder: is the world itself almost like a kind of neural network? Does the world *learn*? Could that be the secret truth behind mysterious phenomena such as Moore's law: that reality itself is like a Bayesian reasoner, which is really only to say that it reasons? Now let us describe the world like this. Anything that exists, insofar as it has a discrete existential status, we can describe as expressing an *existential hypothesis*. Everything speaks to us: “I exist”. 

I am looking at a flower in a vase. In a few days, it will wilt, die, decay, but for now, it is alive, and it tells me such. The probabilistic quality to this claim comes into play when we understand that everything tells us it exists, but not with equal confidence. Some men bellow it with absolute certainty, but some hardly seem sure. Signs of death in living matter haunt us everywhere; jaundiced cheeks and pockmarks hastily covered up with makeup.

So, surely living things, animals, humans, corporations in a competitive environment, are like nodes in a network which expresses the odds that life continues to exist. But a process like this can even be said to occur even in inert matter. There is a beautiful illustration in Yudkowsky's exposition of Bayes’ theorem on Arbital which shows the correspondence between Bayesian prediction and a physical system by describing a waterfall that exists at the convergence between two streams. A fifth of the water supply of the first stream is diverted into the waterfall while simultaneously a third of the water supply of the second stream is as well; now the waterfall contains a mix of the particles in these two streams. The analogy to Bayes is this: first stream is the multiverse of possible worlds in which my lover loves me, the second stream is the one where she does not, and the waterfall is her taking two hours and forty-five minutes to text me back “Haha”, with its expression of probability, this vulgar inseparable mixture.

As such, a sedimentary rock expresses the reality of worlds in which quartz travels down one stream to deposit itself in a bank and intersects with a stream of silicon. As the sediment builds up, it expresses the reality of its existence with increased vigor, as well as the infinite worlds of quartz and silicon expressed in its particles. The rock is built up by the streams and broken down by the air, it provides the initial material for soil. Within this soil, a flower grows. I look at it and I see it not only scream its own existence, but a probabilistic expression of infinite streams of pollen floating through the air, infinite bumblebees carrying it across the sky, streams of minerals, swarms and swarms and swarms of bugs. Life describes not only its own life but the life of everything which contributes to it, life testifies to the conditions for life. When I see life, I know that I may live.

(Although this is only generally true for apex predators like man — that the conditions for life and good health are always a positive sign that also one may live. If one is a prey animal, to exist alongside a very healthy predator is the worst possible thing, and for that reason it might be better to go to less life-generating environments. This is why Nietzsche said that his philosophy of health was a master morality and characterized his philosophical opponents as prey animals, for they mainly define their moral system against fear of some oppressor.)

As Nietzsche told us, it is so much easier to evaluate health than it is to evaluate truth claims; it is not really clear why we even waste time bothering to do the latter. To read through the million words of the LessWrong Sequences or worse, the dense mathematical decision theory published by MIRI on Alignment, is overwhelming and laborious, but to look at Rationalism and notice its death-spiral is very clear. Let us make a gradient descent to greener pastures, more fertile fields.

We look at the cultural products produced by competing actors in the market and we see that the neural network of the universe is being trained. Art is the greatest expression we can make of our health — our confidence in ourselves, our capacity for deep thought, our understanding of the world, our ability to spend time on the non-essential, and above all, our ability to appreciate the marks of good health in others. An economically thriving city produces a cultural scene. I have given up trying to understand what goes on in her head, because I know what it means to have red lips and long flowing hair. Somehow, when I stopped wondering about her, and started only gazing at her, that was when everything changed.

Beauty is more efficient, more effective. The ideal posed by Bayes and Solmonoff, to simulate all these millions of worlds, is totally impossible, totally unthinkable. I've lost the ability to maintain all these dancers in my head; they have started spinning off course in oblique directions. The more I try to simulate my lover, the more she seems to speak only in riddles. The more she started to speak in riddles, the less we felt like communicating in words. These days, we just hand each other flowers. Each flower is a portal to a multiverse, but not even a multiverse which needs to be simulated — one which reveals itself perfectly in its expression: every petal shows us a multitude of streams of bees. Flowers do not need to be interpreted. They are love letters that are not sequences. They sing; they testify.

It is for this same reason that expressing one’s truth claims as couched in probability should perhaps be rejected, as well as the attempt to converge with other reasoners. Whatever one’s hypothesis is, one should commit to it with maximum intensity and vigor. The most noble life is the one where you exist as a truth claim. Let reality herself be the judge — she is a little slow to reason, but loves to be impressed — this is the only way the princess learns.
