## Name One Genius Who Ain't Crazy
##### (The Origins of Game Theory)

We have been talking about the tricks one can play with math. By axiomatizing one’s reasoning process and placing it on purely mathematical grounds, one is able to achieve the sense that one has reached some truth beyond regular thought. One has unveils the hidden face of reality, one escapes the cave, one is now able to make claims which stand for eternity.

The ideal of rationality, as Rationalism defines it, is primarily grounded in a specific text: Von Neumann & Morgenstern's *Theory of Games and Economic Behavior*. This is also the text which establishes game theory. Rationality is defined first in order to describe the desired player of a game.

Very briefly: game theory is a formalism invented to describe games between a set of rational actors. Von Neumann & Morgenstern say that an actor is rational insofar as he has a stable set of preferences. Rational actors play “games” in which a series of outcomes are laid out on a board, measured out in game-chips called Utility. If I decide to go to the red square on the board, I get two Utility, you get one. If I go to the blue square, we each get three, etc. This is the basic nature of the games described. This can be made to parallel people's desires in the real world when we imagine that Utility can refer to our preferences over possible outcomes in our lives — getting accepted to Yale has ten Utility, getting accepted to Northwestern nine, failing to get into college and becoming a Xanax addict has one, etc. Having a stable, ordered set of preferences is a pre-requisite of playing the game.

The complex mathematics of game theory enter when it comes time to predict what the best decision for a given player in the game is. Each player in the game knows that the other is perfectly rational, and has perfect knowledge of the game. Strategy emerges from deception, bluffing, and so on. Complex mathematics are required when working through the expanding tree of potential actions and responses, and then alse the mindfuckery arising from the attempt to model the other player's thoughts: “he knows that I know that he knows that he plans to take red, but then that means that I know that he knows...”, etc.

Any formal mathematical system such as that of VN&M rests on a set of axioms, then it is able to develop truth-statements from those as a set of tautologies. It creates statements which correspond to the real world to the extent that its axioms do. The map is of course never the territory — let us see how the two diverge.

Game theory is an enormously interesting field in terms of the way its system has developed and entered the world. Its intent, as described by Von Neumann and Morgenstern in the preface of their works, is to axiomatize economics and make it a rigorous science as well-grounded as physics. One could in principle, according to VN&M, apply the math of game theory to analyze an economic field and make objective, rational predictions, just as if one could know the positions of all molecules in a physical system one could calculate their position a step further in advance. Some would attempt to apply this to real-world situations with high stakes, as we will soon see. But largely, game theory was not actually able to predictably model the real world, and where it has usage today in institutional settings it is using the most simple games in which there are two players and two choices as heuristics for negotiation in fields such as corporate mergers.

That being said, game theory has been enormously influential in introducing its heuristics to laymen. It is very common to speak of "zero-sum" situations or "zero-sum" thinking; these are the terms introduced to game theory by John Nash. Moreover, the prisoner's dilemma has been widely interpreted as the basic ground of ethics, by presenting a simple scenario in which two players can choose to act selfishly against the other, but will only get the best possible outcome if they trust the other person to cooperate.

What is often not known is that the ubiquitously discussed prisoner's dilemma is not actually something that is understood by game theory, but rather something presented as a *problem* for it. The prisoner's dilemma game was not found by VN&M, but six years later in 1950 by Merrill Flood and Melvin Dresher at RAND Corp. The discovery of the prisoner’s dilemma presents a problem because game theory, via its axioms, predicts the outcome of the game as played by two “rational” players to be mutual betrayal. Purely via the mathematics of game theory, one cannot achieve the good outcome in which both players cooperate unless one introduces something beyond game theory.

This is to say that for the true believer in game theory, the world works like this: game theory describes an economics of bodies that absolutely holds on the level of physics. This calculus guarantees that actors will betray each other to pursue their own ends; mutual betrayal is the set of actions perfectly in accordance with rationality. But in real life, as if some miraculous factor is introduced from outside of the rational economic calculus, they do not. There is this intervention in the world where, for instance, someone like Christ, Buddha, Kant, Confucius, etc. introduces the moral law of cooperation, and afterwards people begin to act non-rationally, to their actual benefit.

What is remarkable is that, upon reading about the prisoner’s dilemma, one is often inspired by its mathematical formalism to feel like one has actually discovered the eternal ground on which ethics rests. We begin to conceive of game theory as more true than something like moral fable via its conceptual purity. This is why it has lodged itself in people's minds today. So many today go around conceiving of ethics in game-theoretic terms — one can see the fabric of the world as prisoner's dilemmas to cooperate or defect in.

But what does it imply that: rather than establishing the ethical law as a basic injunction: “do unto others as you would have others do unto you”, “always try to cooperate for the best outcome”, etc., people have the option now of conceiving of ethical behavior only *by contrast to* a formal, mathematical model of rationality which actually tells us to do the *reverse*? We shall see.

That people will behave selfishly is ultimately not a prediction of game theory, but one of its axioms. Within the basic premises of game theory is that actors are “rational” in a way which entails maximizing their own utility over a stable set of their personal preferences. Von Neumann once said "It is just as foolish to complain that people are selfish and treacherous as it is to complain that the magnetic field does not increase unless the electric field has a curl". It seems that he did believe this principle held on a level equivalent to those of physics.

Game theory is a supreme example of how ideological assumptions and the politics of a state can take on a register of infallibility by being transmuted to the level of a formal mathematical structure. The politics are of course snuck in through the axioms. Game theory has a good shot of applying to reality to the extent that its axioms describe entities that can exist in reality, but as we will see this is quite rare. Moreover, game theory is a discipline that is deeply intertwined with political struggle in a way that is revealing, even disturbing.

Rationalists and other tech-adjacent people will sometimes attempt to place their systems and frameworks beyond critique by insisting that the people who invented them are extremely intelligent, work very hard, are probably smarter than you, and definitely know what they are talking about. In the case of game theory, this is indisputably true. Its primary inventor, John Von Neumann, is often considered to be the smartest man who ever lived by virtue of his sheer number of contributions to the sciences. Nearly every mathematical field which existed in his lifetime he contributed innovations towards, an accomplishment otherwise entirely unheard of.

Von Neumann started out his career for the first two decades or so innovating within “pure” mathematics, which was his area of intense curiosity and joy. He made breakthroughs within set theory, ergodic theory, topology, operator theory, lattice theory, statistics, and the mathematics of quantum mechanics. But there seems to have been a defining moment in his life which led to a sudden shift of focus away from abstractions and into practical problems.

This was his participation in the Manhattan Project, in which he designed the explosive lenses necessary to guide the initial shape of the detonation in the “Fat Man” atomic bomb. Unlike his coworker Robert Oppenheimer, who was famously deeply distraught over his own participation in the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Von Neumann seemed to experience no guilt over working on the project of mass death, enjoying the practicality of putting his mind towards military purposes, and would actively seek out opportunities for similar work as much as he could for the rest of his life.

Nuclear weaponry became Von Neumann's primary practical concern. He would go on to involve himself deeply in nuclear war strategy, including personally supervising nuclear bomb tests. He became a commissioner of the US Government's Atomic Energy Commission, he would directly present his opinions on nuclear strategy to President Eisenhower, and would work as a consultant for the CIA, the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group, as well as every branch of the US military other than the Coast Guard. Von Neumann would consistently advise his clients in the US government to speed up the development of new bombs, ensuring the absolute edge over the USSR. By the end of his life, Von Neumann's appetite for “pure” work had almost completely dried up as he spent his time instead consulting for a wide array of clients in the military-industrial complex and the corporate world. This was to the dismay of many of his peers, who felt that Von Neumann was at this point obsessed with weapons and strategy at the expense of frivolously wasting his once-in-a-century genius.

Von Neumann was not an apolitical actor. He had fled both communism — the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic of 1919 — as well as National Socialism, and much preferred the stability of the capitalist states. He described himself to the Senate as “violently anti-communist, and a good deal more militaristic than most”. He would elaborate: “My opinions have been violently opposed to Marxism ever since ... I had about a three-month taste of it in Hungary in 1919.”*The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior* is an odd text, given that it presents itself as an economic text, yet its logic seems much more appropriate for war. VN&M’s theory would be just one of several ontologies emerging in the post-war era which would aim to describe all of the social field in terms of games: Ludwig Wittgenstein’s theory of language games, Eric Berne’s *Games People Play*, James Carse’s *Finite and Infinite Games*, etc. The term “game” can have an ambiguous quality; primarily it would seem to denote the potential for enjoyment or play.

But the games of VN&M are instead deadly serious; formal, rule-bound, high-stakes, no creativity or improvisation involved; this isn’t “Truth or Dare” or Charades. The games of VN&M describe the situation when you and another player are locked in a head to head strategic competition over the same set of game pieces, and if one player wins, the other loses. (There are also games of three, or four, but the many-player games VN&M describe in their text would see little adoption in analysis due to their intractable complexity; the field has mostly developed around two-player games).

Was Von Neumann thinking of warfare when he wrote the theory? There is no direct proof of this, but it seems enormously likely to be the case. VN&M published the first edition of *Theory of Games* in 1944, when Von Neumann was working at the Manhattan Project and the US was escalating towards invading Europe. It seems as if a general system of mathematical warfare had been occupying his mind for some time, as during the war, Von Neumann was confident that the Allies would win because he had mapped out a mathematical model of the conflict taking into account each county’s industrial resources.

Game theory makes the most sense when you view it as in referent to aerial warfare. The strategy of which “square” to go to is really which square on the map to bomb — the Utility one captures there is really the amount of the enemy's resources one has destroyed. The reason for all the mindfuckery around “I know he knows I plan to go there, so then I will go to the other square, but then he knows...” has to do with the pragmatics of marshaling planes in shock-and-awe tactics against enemy lines. One naturally wants to bomb the target which is most vital to the enemy's operation, but then that is also the site that one expects the enemy to have put the most resources into defending. So then one orients one’s planes towards the second-most valuable target, but then one expects the enemy to have anticipated that move, and etc. Hence the need for the elaborate calculations of the theory. 

Von Neumann’s genius over these sorts of things was not an idle occupation, but actively used by the Allies. He would be consulted by Merrill Flood (who later discovered the prisoner’s dilemma problem) to devise a strategy for selecting which targets to attack first in an aerial bombing of Japan. And it seemed to Von Neumann that the importance of this strategic calculus would not be of short-term relevance. Although it would not be clear to the world until a few years later that Stalin would not abide by peace treaties and thus the Allied victory would open up into a new great power conflict, Von Neumann began predicting a nuclear war between the US and the Soviets as soon as the first bombs dropped on Japan. Von Neumann’s recommendation was that the US begin and end this war as swiftly as possible, saying “with the Russians it is not a question of whether, but when” and “If you say why not bomb them tomorrow, I say why not today? If you say today at five o clock, I say why not one o clock?”.

This sort of striking appetite for violence does not strike us as *rational*, exactly, yet it does not contradict Von Neumann’s decision theory: if the mathematics recommend an outcome be pursued at some point, there is no reason to postpone it. And yet of course we know not to act this way in real life, or at least most of us do: haste, impatience is usually not the best approach, any new factors can enter the field of decision-making that might cause one to re-evaluate, etc. But that is not the world of game theory — so radically unlike the real world — with its stable, well-delineated game boards. Of course, there are many who find it so much easier to think in a world with well-delineated game boards, or can only think in a world with well-delineated game boards, for better or for worse.