## To Think One's Way to Armaggedon
##### **(Game Theory in Practice)**

The primary body to expand on VN&M's original formulation of game theory would be the RAND Corporation, the prototype for the modern-day think tank. RAND which loosely stands for “Research and Development” — was formed in 1945 by military officers who had enjoyed having such brilliant scientists and intellectuals as Von Neumann on their payroll during the war and were frantically scrambling to figure out how to retain them. Essentially, RAND was a way to carry on the vibrant scientific atmosphere of the Manhattan Project and continue to place it in the service of the US war apparatus, despite the delicate start of a peace.

In 1950, RAND would hire nearly all the top researchers in the emerging field of game theory; it would become the laboratory for this new science to develop. RAND Corp would produce a great number of strategic documents to inform government policy, primarily on issues around air warfare. What RAND became uniquely known for was advancing the science of “wargaming”, which meant developing board games which researchers at RAND would spend their time playing to work through military strategies.

Board games have always had a relationship to war; the most canonical board games of chess and Go were formed as abstract simulations of warfare for kings to play in their idle hours to hone their strategic thinking. RAND was inspired by the Prussian war game Kriegsspiel which nineteenth-century military officers played while off-duty. The sharpened tactical mind that Prussian officers achieved through this form of recreation was sometimes credited for leading to their victory in the Franco-Prussian war.

RAND innovated enormously in the field of wargaming, leading not only to the proliferation of such practices in para-governmental bodies (today think tank personnel play Covid war games, war games around potential disputed elections, and so on), but also in recreation. Wargaming as a hobby took off enormously in the early decades of the Cold War, during which the art form branched out from simulating real-world military scenarios into the escapism of “fantasy wargaming”. This form of recreation would develop into *Dungeons and Dragons*, *Warhammer*, and eventually computer strategy games like *Warcraft* and *League of Legends*. Pong is often cited as the first video game in 1972, but this is merely the first video game to be commercially available, as RAND was innovating within computer graphics to make video game simulations for military use as early as twenty years prior. It is widely known that the internet was first developed by the US military as a mechanism for strategy, but it is less known that this is also true about video games.

Prior to the invention of large language models, progress in artificial intelligence was measured in AI’s ability to win at these board games, with the 1996 defeat of Garry Kasparov by Deep Blue in chess and the 2016 defeat of Lee Sedol by AlphaGo being enormous milestones which recalibrated researchers’ expectations of when machine capabilities would one day exceed humans. Last year, Meta’s CICERO achieved victory in a tournament of the board game *Diplomacy*, a realistic war game of the kind which RAND played, and one which requires tactical deception. As somewhat of an aside, it’s interesting to note that today’s neural networks can only be as powerful as they are due to widespread availability of GPUs, which were developed for consumers to play first-person shooter games. If humans did not enjoy simulating themselves in the role of an executioner behind the barrel of a gun, the Singularity might be forty more years away.

Despite all this, RAND never got very far in developing game theory into a predictive science. RAND intellectuals R. Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa wrote in 1957 “We have the historical fact that many social scientists have become disillusioned with game theory. Initially there was a naive band-wagon feeling that game theory solved innumerable problems of sociology and economics, or that, at the least it made their solution a practical matter of a few years’ work. This has not turned out to be the case.” Though game theory would continue to be applied in situations resembling stand-offs, it would not become the broadly revelatory theory its creators envisioned.

But what then of game theory’s implications for economics? One can credit Von Neumann with revolutionizing liberal political economy and placing it on new logical grounds; he has even been described (eg by S.M. Amadae) as the most important economic thinker of the 20th century. There is something very remarkable about the fact that a framework for re-thinking political economy would also be a framework for re-thinking war, because around this time the two fields of life would begin to  blend into one another.

In 1944, the same year *Theory of Games* was published, the world economy would be given new grounds at the Bretton Woods Conference. Developments in international affairs imitated what VN&M were achieving in thought. It was believed that Hitler’s rise could retroactively be blamed on economic nationalism and unstable currencies, thus the International Monetary Fund was established to oversee the economic relationships between the democracies and supervise a fixed exchange rate. The new economic metric of GNP was assigned as a means to evaluate the health of individual nations. The changes in how economics were conceptualized were revolutionary enough that the world discovered a new term: *the economy*, which according to historian Timothy Mitchell was a phrase which only entered into parlance in the 1930s. Prior to the depression and Second World War, people would speak of political economy as a craft practiced by the state, but never of *the economy* as the totality of production, a new object which one could separate oneself from, survey, understand, and manipulate.

In the Second World War, the world had seen for the first time the horrors of total war, a struggle into which the fighting powers had placed the totality of their industries, and thus engendering a tragic situation in which there could be no real distinction between civilian and military targets. Several years later, in the grand nuclear standoff of the Cold War, there is no longer anymore even a distinction between war and peace — if at any moment the comparative level of industrial productivity between the two great powers is as such that the one has first-strike capability over the other, the balance of mutually-assured destruction is threatened. In RAND Corp’s publication *The Economics of Defense in the Nuclear Age* in the year 1953, this problem is considered at length, and the author Charles Hitch discusses how GNP is a resource that can be diverted to either peaceful or military means, with each productive resource in the US not potentially useful to the war machine costing us a corresponding risk of unpreparedness.

There is a paradox we can touch on here regarding the nature of the Cold War. To the war hawk, such as Von Neumann, existence within a capitalist economy could be nothing less like life in the Soviet bloc. The former means freedom, innovation, ability to speak one’s mind, recreation and art; the latter propaganda, terror, forced labor, work camps, being marched everywhere by men with guns. Hence the deep importance of US victory, even if one has to gamble a few hundred million lives to achieve this. If the Soviets were to win a nuclear exchange and achieve global communism as they desire, the future would look like some interminable horror show from which creativity and freedom would have no hope of emerging again; Orwell's boot on a human face forever.

And yet, Von Neumann has developed a economic theory which applies as firmly as physics; thus according to his claims it must apply universally. Despite the fact that the Soviet citizen is told from birth that he is foremost a member of a mass of workers and secondarily an individual, and we are told the opposite, it must be a law of nature that the Russian is just as selfish as the American nevertheless. And then, conversely, to effectively wage economic-nuclear war, the American state must be able to rapidly marshal its resources as it wills, liberalism be damned, tinting it with an off-color Stalinist hue.

Oskar Morgenstern, Von Neumann’s collaborator, would go on to found several market and policy research companies. One of his corporations, Mathematica Inc. would perform the first social policy experiment in the United States: the New Jersey Income Maintenance Experiment, which studied the effects of a universal basic income. The question is: if you give poor families money, will they then be disincentivized to show up to work? We can see here that the liberal democracies are attempting to solve the same question as socialism, but under a different set of axioms; rather than imagining that we can form collective units within which man can work and live, we must treat him as a self-interested individual, who we allow to feed himself as long as we make sure he doesn't have the means to get lazy.

The two competing power blocs begin to resemble one another more than they would like to admit. Around the dawn of the Cold War, the US was passing strangely communism-adjacent policies for the sake of maintaining resources for the war machine. Soon after the victory in Japan, fearing a depression and domestic unease after millions of military men would be out of jobs, Congress passed the Employment Act of 1946, which mandated that the government set economic policy so that every able-bodied man would remain employed. This would never be successful, and is not reflected in policy today — economists now maintain that a certain amount of unemployment is ideal for economic growth. Another example is in 1952, when Harry Truman signed an executive order nationalizing the entire US steel industry to serve the Korean War (this would be struck down by the Supreme Court). After all, in nuclear war, even the relative dispersal of populations and industrial centers can be of deep importance to determining whether the society would recover from a first strike. Therefore where each citizen happens to be standing at any given time becomes a military question.

RAND would make a number of reports recommending when it was worth it to sacrifice an everyday civilian like a piece on the go board. In 1966, RAND wrote a report suggesting what US policy should be after a potential nuclear war. In this report RAND asserted that the surviving state would lack enough resources to provide for all people, and as such people like the elderly and the disabled should be left to die if they could not provide for themselves. The implication for peacetime could only be that prior to a nuclear war, resources being sent to these people weren't contributing to the US's capabilities to survive a nuclear attack either, and this also should perhaps be considered.

Von Neumann himself had no problem with speaking out loud the greater-good utilitarian calculations of nuclear warfare which would strike the average person as awful to contemplate. Von Neumann was a vocal advocate of increased atomic testing, though he recognized that there could be health risks in spreading radiation to the populace. On this issue, he said: “The present vague fear and vague talk regarding the adverse world-wide effects of general radioactive contamination are all geared to the concept that any general damage to life must be excluded... Every worthwhile activity has a price, both in terms of certain damage and of potential damage — of risks — and the only relevant question is, whether the price is worth paying... For the US it is. For another country, with no nuclear industry and a neutralistic attitude in world politics it may not be”.

The most extreme scenario demonstrating this strategic attitude towards citizens’ lives occurred in 1961, when RAND and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara briefed President Kennedy on a potential nuclear strategy. Kennedy had won the 1960 presidential campaign in which the forefront issue was the “missile gap” between the US and the Soviet Union. It was claimed by Kennedy that the Soviet Union possessed more nuclear warheads and America desperately needed to catch up; he promised his voters he would rectify this as President. Kennedy’s nuclear hawkishness on the campaign trail was so extreme that when the famous leftist critic Noam Chomsky was recently asked if the election of Donald Trump had been the most afraid he had ever been watching a new President, he replied no, it wasn't as terrifying as listening to Kennedy in ‘60.

But in fact, unbeknownst to Kennedy, there was no missile gap, and instead the gap ran the other way. The US was actually well in the lead, a fact which the CIA would inform him of after he took office. However, it was not always destined to be so, according to the CIA; the Soviets were likely to catch up. There was a small window of opportunity in which the US could strike and have a guarantee of winning the Cold War while they still could, and the President was asked to consider exercising this option. RAND had drafted a proposal for a first-strike surprise nuclear assault which would kill 54 percent of the USSR’s population and destroy 82 percent of its buildings. Meanwhile, American casualties were predicted to be anywhere between zero to 75 percent of the population, depending on the nature of the Soviet counterattack and the resulting spread of radiation. Lives could potentially be saved by ordering citizens to hide in nuclear shelters for two weeks to wait out the initial fallout, then re-emerge. President Kennedy was disturbed by this briefing; he is reported as leaving the room in the middle of the meeting, lamenting: “And we call ourselves the human race”. The proposal was not introduced again.

As we know, nuclear war between the great powers never happened, and this seems to have been  despite RAND and their game theory rather than because of it. The reasons why the Cold War did not end in a horrific bloodbath are surely complex and multifactorial. Put as simply as possible, we could maybe say that when men came up close to the ladder of escalation they found that they very much lacked the appetite for it. The Cuban Missile crisis sparked when the Soviets believed that they could install a nuclear warhead in Cuba and the US was unlikely to do anything about it. When it became clear that the US would escalate in response, they backed down. After these few weeks of horror when doomsday seemed possibly moments away, the great powers never escalated again and policy largely swung towards disarmament. This tiny taste of nuclear war was all anyone wanted in the end.

There are a number of essays breaking down the events of the Cuban Missile Crisis in terms of game theory and studying whether the outcome fits the predictions of the model, but perhaps more pertinently we should ask if the presumptions of the model make sense in the first place. The Cuban Missile Crisis was not a standoff between two rational actors, but two states composed of many contentiously arguing politicians, highly emotional, oscillating between fear and bloodthirsty zealotry. How do we model, for instance, Fidel Castro furiously appealing to the Soviets that they give the Cubans the right to fire the missiles installed on their island, certain that despite the US’s lead in armaments any ensuing violence would hasten the unstoppable dialectic of Marxism, saying “The Cuban people are prepared to sacrifice themselves for the cause of the destruction of imperialism and the victory of world revolution”? And don't we have to admit that it is quite uncommon to be able to act like a game theorist and crunch numbers over one's utility, and far more normal to be like Kennedy and simply refuse to? Given that, why would the assumption that one’s opponent is “rational” be a part of the model?

The question is whether any agent who mirrors the norm of a rational, game-theoretic agent has actually ever existed. The game-theoretic agent has a fixed set of stable preferences over external outcomes in the world. This does not describe any of us, who endlessly agonize and prevaricate over what we want. When we get what we want, we are not sure we wanted it. People reach orgasm and find themselves suddenly horrified, racing to kick their lover out of their bed and then block them on Hinge. People do not think they want something and then contemplate it for a few minutes and realize they do. People are afraid to contemplate some things for too long lest they realize that they want them. In general, people’s desires do not remain stable when they are put in a standoff with another, but morph in a way which responds to and imitates the other's desires. On this point, one may refer to the theories of Rene Girard on imitative desire or those of Jacques Lacan and his famous statement “all desire is the desire of the Other”.

Why should any of us strive for “rationality”, or stability over our preferences, when we might be perfectly happy to be spontaneous? The answer is that VN&M demonstrated that if you do not have stable desires, you can be taken advantage of. This is because: if in the morning you will pay $5 for ice cream and $8 for cigarettes, and if at five o clock you will pay $8 for ice cream and $5 for the cigs, I can consistently exploit you by buying ice cream from you in the morning and selling it back to you at night, and vice versa with the cigarettes Which is to say that rationality is made imperative via an adversarial context, albeit one unlikely to ever matter outside of the strategic games of economic warfare that the Cold War implies.

But this raises the core question. Though we perhaps have yet to see a game-theoretic agent, could we perhaps build one? Is the rise of a superhuman AI as a game-theoretic agent which wages rational warfare possible, and therefore inevitable?