## **The World Does Not Exist**
##### **(The Impossibility of Intelligence)**

AI systems which use game theory have been built, mostly to play games. Yudkowsky has said that he is not especially afraid of LLMs turning into existential threats, but is much more afraid of systems like MuZero. MuZero was developed as a modification of the AlphaGo architecture, which learned to play go at a superhuman level via simulating play against itself millions of time, much like the bored aristocrats of old or the strategists at RAND Corp. MuZero takes a step beyond AlphaGo by being able to learn a number of games (chess, go, shogi, simple Atari games) without first being programmed with knowledge of the rules, thus moving towards a general game-playing intelligence.

Will intelligences like this be able to ascend beyond the game board and deploy in real-world strategic situations? Yudkowsky fears that general-purpose game-playing agents will, by repeatedly simulating various scenarios, develop a complex set of strategies for world conquest, learning new sciences such as nanotechnology, offensive cybersecurity, and psychological manipulation of humans, then rapidly deploy them towards perverse ends. But there are some great obstacles when it comes to moving beyond the game board into real life. How is a neural network supposed to extrapolate beyond a model which operates over a game board of sixty-four squares (or several hundred in the case of go) and start surveying — even in a compressed, simplified representation — the infinitely complex terrain of the real world? From where does it even begin?

The computational complexity of such a problem seems to enormously exceed any realistic system. This points towards the fundamental reason why game-theoretic agents are not able to exist in real life. According to the axioms of VN&M’s theory, a rational agent has ranked preferences across all various outcomes of possibilities in the world. Game theory requires a notion of the world, and stable knowledge of it. But the problem for game theory is that The World, as it is conceived, does not exist. What does this mean? While human beings, or other agents, have access to worlds, there is no such thing as The World. Or rather, insofar as there is, it must be elaborately constructed.

The biologist Jakob von Uexküll describes primitive organisms as existing within a world, one containing a finite number of signs which indicate possible actions the organism may take. The most simple world von Uexküll illustrates is that of a tick, which lives in a world made up of only three symbols: the smell of mammals’ glands, the temperature of mammalian blood, and the sensation of hair, all of which assembled together allow it to find the blood on which it lives. The tick has three primitive sensors; when these are not activated, the tick lives in darkness, motionless.

As organisms evolve to become more complex, their individual world grows in complexity, but it still has the quality of consisting of signs which guide the organism, a set of poles which the organism has an essential relationship to. When my wife switches to sleeping facing away from me rather than towards me, I know she is plagued by unspoken thoughts, I know the upcoming weeks will be filled with tension and doubt. When I get home from work and smell cinnamon in the air, I know she has started baking again, which means something about her has changed. These two poles might determine far more of my world than everything else, the stars in the sky and the wars in the East.

We believe we live in The World rather than a world because we are able to, for instance, observe The World on Google Maps. We are able to go on certain websites which present us with an image of the globe and then click on each city and get an accurate description of the weather there. We are able to watch a flight tracker and see the planes fly across it in real time. We are able to open up an encyclopedia and read population statistics for each city on Earth. These are things we now take for granted, but they are of course only possible due to a vast, tireless technological apparatus which surveys the Earth, takes measurements, marshals out officers to record censuses, and updates us always. The World assembles itself out of a busy set of machines that are fallible and are capable of breaking down, needing repairs.

It is because we believe we live in The World that we can take seriously the ethics of someone like Peter Singer who argues that we should make moral judgments according to a utilitarian calculus that operates across all humans in the world and considers them as equals; that we should lament the suffering of a Pakistani serf we have never seen or known and whose existence to us is a number in a census, just as we would care for someone standing five feet away.

Just like The Economy, The World ascends into view with the Allied victory in the Second World War. RAND Corporation’s first major initiative, beginning as early as 1946, was to encourage the development of satellites to take pictures of the Earth from space. In a 1966 interview, Martin Heidegger would remark on the then-recently released satellite photos of the Earth in dismay, lamenting “I don't know if you were shocked, but certainly I was shocked when a short time ago I saw the pictures of the earth taken from the moon... It is no longer upon an earth that man lives today”. When The World becomes an object like any other, that one can separate oneself from and view at a distance, can one still be said to be living in it? And yet The World — in the famous *Blue Marble* satellite photo we have all seen, and also in the stream of data which forms its representation today — presents itself as a unity but is in truth a collage of many photographs and data-points from scattered machines, stitched together to give the illusion of a single object. To turn the world into an object, one has to work hard.

Artificial intelligence is not born with access to The World; if it requires this, it must first be immaculately constructed. The map is not the territory, but it is also a miracle when there is even a reasonable map. Aerial photography would become as much of a sought-after weapon of mass destruction in the Cold War as the bombs themselves, for without them the planes would have no idea where to strike. Russia was publishing inaccurate maps of their own territory to avoid giving their secrets away. China still scrambles all the coordinates on the satellite photography they publish and which you can view on Google Maps today. The CIA would have to be clever in figuring out how to procure maps and measurements of Soviet bombs for the strategists at RAND, and their estimations of Russia's capabilities were constantly changing.

The confusion was even worse than that, because the ability of RAND to model the resources available in the conflict was not just limited to what was behind enemy lines. It was not only difficult to get a reasonable estimation over how many bombs the Soviets had, but how many bombs the US had as well. Policy-makers would expect the number of atomic bombs to be a simple quantity reported to them and become deeply frustrated when the military would not report a straight answer. In fact, in the early years of the Cold War, it was impossible to say how many atomic bombs the US had, because bombs needed to be assembled as-needed, given that the plutonium and batteries in them would need to be quickly replaced after being activated. These components were usually stored separately, and thus maintaining a nuclear arsenal meant maintaining a complex flow over a variety of crucial supplies, the availability of which could not necessarily be known before they were requested.

Intelligence cannot operate without data — in the case of artificial intelligence, enormous amounts. In the case of the war machine, intelligence means reconnaissance, mapping, spycraft. In Yudkowsky’s doomsday scenarios, the AI annihilates all life by first spawning sub agents such as nano-machines, self-assembling replicators, autonomous computer viruses. Certainly marshaling out legions would be something an AI must to do to see beyond the datacenter it gets born in. The question is whether the sub-agents the AI spawns retain loyalty to their sovereign. The AI king is simulating their behavior and believes he can predict it, but this simulation is necessarily a compressed representation. As the war game plays itself out in the real-world field, do deviations, mutations, breakdowns, mutinies occur?

In real military life, the history of intelligence has been disastrous. The Central Intelligence Agency was formed in 1947 with the mission of gathering intelligence in the field abroad in order to report it to the President, and it is prohibited from spying on American citizens. As is well known, the CIA would quickly depart from merely observing and reporting to their masters and instead began taking strategic actions on their own terms: staging coups in foreign countries, assassinating foreign leaders, working with organized crime, and, of course, spying on Americans.

The intelligence on what the communists were planning was often wrong, and the CIA was almost always biased in the direction of excessive paranoia rather than unpreparedness. The CIA consistently over-estimated the amount of missiles the Soviets had. The Strategic Defense Initiative program of the Reagan era (also known as “Star Wars”) was kicked off by the Defense Department's insistence that the US was far behind the USSR in the development of lasers which could shoot down satellites from space, an claim similar to the “missile gap” of the Kennedy era. As with the missile gap, this would turn out to be fictional.

At times, the brunt end of this paranoia would be borne by everyday people. The infamous MKUltra experiments in which citizens were abducted and drugged by CIA agents for research purposes were sparked because the military was horrified to find that normal patriotic American soldiers taken prisoner in Korea would sometimes come back repeating communist slogans given to them by their captors. The military believed that the North Koreans possessed some diabolical brainwashing technique, and aggressive research was demanded in this field so that the communists would not remain in sole possession of a weapon that the free countries did not know. But by our knowledge today, it seems like if the North Koreans had any brainwashing techniques, it was basic sleep deprivation and breakdown of the ego, certainly nothing like the fantastic range of chemicals and torture devices MKUltra would experiment non-consensually with on American citizens.

The great event illustrating the failure of intelligence is the Vietnam War. The United States never formally declared war on Vietnam — officially, there was never a war at all. Rather, the US somehow slid from delicately managing a policing situation into developing a theater of grand death and destruction without ever explicitly realizing that was what it was doing, largely through the actions of the CIA. In L. Fletcher Prouty’s book *The Secret Team*, he describes how the CIA under Allen Dulles operated and how it led to the escalation in Vietnam. At the highest level, the CIA saw itself as supervising a sophisticated machine that would operate using cybernetic principles. The CIA had assets in offices all over the world reporting events; its superpower was not so much competence but rather the ability to be in all places at all times. Agents in various offices were given operational doctrines which consisted of something resembling computer instructions; they would take the form of if-this-then-that. No agent knew the whole shape of the plans; due to the need for operational secrecy, they would just know when they were ordered to carry out its next step. Thus one event could kick off a whole chain of responses through various agents playing out the clandestine logic of the machine.

Ever since the independence of South Vietnam in 1954, the CIA was active in the region carrying out operations of this nature to prevent the rise of communism. If there were signs of communist activity in one area, the operational plan of the CIA entailed responding with various measures intending to dampen it, such as psychological operations, population transfer, or killing and torture of suspected communists. Rather than easing the threat, the level of communist agitation only rose in response to these counter-actions. At the bottom of the stack of if-this-then-that protocols were overt violent responses which looked much more like conventional war. Over about a decade of CIA operations in Vietnam, the escalation rose to that level.

The emergence of open hostilities in Vietnam would be greeted by many in the defense bureaucracy with excitement, as it would allow for an opportunity to test out the philosophy of “rational” warfare that RAND Corporation had been eagerly strategizing in the past two decades. The Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, was an enormous believer in the idea that warfare could be made more elegant by using computers. McNamara had an unusual background for a defense secretary; he had never before held military or government leadership. Rather, he was a successful corporate consultant who had revolutionized operations at Ford Motors by using statistical modeling to guide management decisions. McNamara would transfer this business strategy into war, becoming an enthusiastic proponent of using the predictions given by similar computer programs RAND had engineered to make decisions for troop movements in Vietnam.

As strategy in Vietnam increasingly collapsed, the term “McNamara syndrome” developed to describe McNamara's persistent attitude that if a factor was not measurable in one of RAND’s computer models, it was of no relevance. McNamara's attitude was exemplified by the promotion of Project 100,000, which was a commission to draft a hundred thousand soldiers who did not meet the standard mental aptitude requirements the army had established. McNamara desperately needed more recruits and believed that in the new age of rational computerized warfare, the ground soldier's intelligence was irrelevant, or could be made up for with technology. In the real tragic outcome, the recruits of Project 100,000 died at three times the rate of their more mentally apt peers.

Proponents of rational warfare dreamt that an intelligent strategy could not only be more effective than that of previous wars, but also more humane. If an army was able to use the mappings of game theory to swiftly destroy only the most important targets from the air, it could perhaps force a quick surrender and spare human life. The bombing strategy in Vietnam would initially begin as tactical bombing of this nature, sending planes to eliminate key targets and then retreat. This did not work, so the US switched to strategic bombing; a campaign of terror going after major population centers, intending to demoralize the communists into submission. Over the course of the war, the US would drop over 7.5 million tons of bombs on Southeast Asia, more than double what was deployed in the Second World War. The US military deployed not only this bleak arsenal of annihilation, but other amazing technologies which one might wish were only available to gods. This included climate warfare: manipulating the weather to prevent the North Vietnamese from attacking, a remarkable war strategy which Von Neumann was an early proponent of. In one of its most surreal moments, the US military was even able to hijack the brains of dolphins using cybernetics and remote-control them to use as bomb delivery mechanisms. But despite its stupendous technics and the wizardly mastery of reality it accomplished, the US was not able to win its decades-long war against peasant guerillas. At the end of the day, the most cliché of humanist slogans might very will be true: the computers and their operators didn't understand that they could not calculate the endless supply of Vietnamese will to keep fighting.

The failure in the Vietnam War would of course not be an exception, but the model for repeated American military failures to come. In Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Syria, the US repeatedly found itself unable to rationally model the numerous swarms of silent guerrilla forces which its attempts to suppress only bred. Rational warfare never worked.
