## **Please Handle Your Imagination With Care**
##### **(Critiquing Physics through Poetry )**

What does it mean to be rational, or to use reason? The Rationalists are those who believe that reason is the source of invention and growth, that one’s ideas can be trusted the closer one hews to the dictates of reason, that reason is what will *solve* the AI Alignment problem and thus be the savior of man.

We confess to having a rather different view. on how things work. Yudkowsky’s ideas, in the context of the larger development of Western thought, can strike one as of a simpler time. We think fondly back to the “Age of Reason”, or another term for the Enlightenment, a period in thought which is said to begin in the late 17th century and ended in the early 19th, in which reason was felt to be sufficient to solve all of man’s problems. Yudkowsky’s Rationalists soldier on, unaware that many in the mainstream have declared that this period of optimism has closed.

Why did the Age of Reason end, and why did it pass over into romanticism and related movements which emphasized the heart over the mind? To examine this, we will focus on a figure near and dear to our hearts: the late 18th to early 19th century poet William Blake. In a way, Blake was the first post-rationalist, occupying a strange position at the closer of the Age of Reason and just before its passage into romanticism, being a pivotal figure exemplifying the transition between the two. Blake was understood and admired by only a handful of people in his lifetime, but as in Brian Eno’s remark about the Velvet Underground — “they only sold thirty thousand records, but everyone who bought one of those thirty thousand records started a band” — the figures he was influential to would become important to the following generations: first the proto-romantic poets of Wordsworth and Coleridge, then to the rest of the famous romantics who followed.

We admit to being something of irrationalists, though we prefer the term surrealists. For our gospel, we take Blake’s *Marriage of Heaven and Hell*, specifically where he says: “Energy is the only life, and is from the Body; and Reason is the bound or outward circumference of Energy. Those who restrain desire, do so because theirs is weak enough to be restrained; and the restrainer or reason usurps its place and governs the unwilling. And being restrained, it by degrees becomes passive, till it is only the shadow of desire”.

Or in other words, we are not opposed to reason, but we imagine it as a conservative, regulating force in opposition to *desire*. It appears to us that one does something, or conceives of an action, out of some sort of positive desire, some impulse which stems from the body (though it is important to recognize that according to Blake, “Man has no Body distinct from his Soul”). Only secondarily does one ask oneself: did I have a *reason* to do that, or what might that reason be?

Throughout Blake’s poetry, he extends this basic sensibility towards the mind into a grand mythological structure in which reason, or the Governor, is given the shape of a pathetic old tyrant who puts cages around young women. Blake conceives of rational structures as the discarded husks of desire, lacking in life or power, having no right to be stronger than beauty or youth, yet somehow stronger nevertheless.

When you ask intellectuals what led to the end of the Age of Reason, they will often speak to philosophical developments on the continent. Reason becomes non-Reason when it is forced to confront the fact that it is rational to conceive of reason as having boundaries, and thus, the Age of Reason passes over into the Age of Critique — the critical philosophies of Freud, Marx. We are less interested in this supposed origin of critique in mid-19th century Germany than we are in the earlier genesis of English romanticism in Blake, the point at which Enlightenment understands that it needs to become poetry to become profound.

We feel that Blake has a strong critique of the Age of Reason, and it has to do with considering the question of Imagination.

In Blake’s text *All Religions Are One* he argues “As all men are alike (tho' infinitely various), So all Religions & as all similars have one source. The true Man is the source, he being the Poetic Genius”. Blake’s eighteenth-century syntax is a little difficult to parse, but the concept is straightforward: we know from having gone through the Enlightenment, understanding science, etc., that all religions come from man’s imagination, rather than gods, spirits, etc., actually existing — so what we should be worshipping is man’s imagination, since this is in fact what we were worshipping all along in the guise of various spirits. Blake claims to be a Christian, but he is a very odd heretical sort of Christian — he worships Jesus Christ precisely because Blake believes Christ to be a mortal man who was an exceptional poet, and thus the true meaning of the Christian religion is that the poet, or he who can use his Imagination with clarity, is effectively a god.

Man necessarily is using his imagination at all times. However, sometimes he forgets he is doing so, and at this point he becomes alienated from his own imaginings. At this point, the imagination breeds monsters, shadows, specters, bogeymen in the closet. Serpents, if you will. The problem is that he thinks whatever he happens to be accidentally imagining is real. Man is liable to frighten himself if he does not understand that he is in control of his own imagination at all times, and so he is free to imagine whatever he wishes.

Blake’s greatest opponents in religion are the Deists, for these he spares no harsh words: “You, O Deists, profess yourselves the Enemies of Christianity, and you are so: you are also the Enemies of the Human Race & of Universal Nature”, he proclaims. Deism was the form of religion fashionable in the educated upper classes of Blake’s time. Having discovered from the science of Newton that the universe could be conceptualized as a mechanism in which each event occurs with total determinism as like a series of pulleys and pendulums, or like balls knocking around a pool table, educated Englishmen found little room for believe in faith, prayer, or miracles. However, they did not want to abandon the idea of God entirely, so they conceived of God as someone who existed entirely prior to the universe and fashioned it, yet now plays no active role in its developments. In other words, God is like a clockmaker who “wound up the universe like a clock” and let it go, leaving it alone.

*There is No Natural Religion* is the Blake text which best exemplifies Blake’s critique of Deism, which Blake also treats with the title of *Natural Religion*. By Natural Religion, Blake is referring to religious arguments which take the form of an argument-a-priori-from-first-principles, similar to the method of reasoning used in the Natural Law of John Locke, who is perhaps Blake’s most hated enemy.

Blake sums up the argument for why a rationalist religion is impossible, by saying this: “Reason, or the ratio of all we have already known, is not the same that it shall be when we know more… The bounded is loathed by its possessor. The same dull round even of a universe would soon become a mill with complicated wheels… The desire of Man being Infinite, the possession is Infinite & himself Infinite.” In other words, it is impossible to create a bracketing of the nature of God in a rational, formal structure, because it is always possible to add another human desire to what the structure is possible to contain, and thus render it insufficient.

But Blake, throughout his epic poetry, adds a second meaning to “Natural Religion”, a more intuitive meaning: the worship of nature, of forest spirits, paganism. Blake regularly describes Deism as a modern “Druidism”, which perhaps seems like an odd conceptual leap, but this is a gesture indicating only what we have described above regarding the alienation of the imagination. Druidism: the religion of vast human sacrifice in flaming wicker men, occurs when men imagine great forest gods that they believe are real, naive to the fact that these gods are coming from their own imagination. Blake seems to believe that, when men begin to fear their own shadows en masse, violence necessarily results.

We are ready to now introduce the beginning step of the Blakean Critique. Blake, a great poet, looks with trepidation at bad poets. Everyone is using their own imagination, but some are not aware of it. Deism is really a sort of poetry itself, or it would add nothing on top of the Newtownian science it is inspired by. The religion of Deism is a poem in which God is a clockmaker, a mechanist. This is a poem that condemns man to be as fated in his life’s trajectory as a ball in a pinball machine, leading man to be blind of the power of his imagination which can conceive of a different way through life than the one assigned to him, or a different relationship to God.

This sort of self-imposed terror Blake tells us that men find themselves in when their imaginations get away from themselves reminds us of probably the most infamous concept emerging from LessWrong: Roko’s Basilisk. This notorious moment in forum history occurred when LessWrong user Roko hypothesized that an artificial superintelligence might emerge in the future and out of pettiness, dig through information archives for a memory of which humans helped bring it about and which did not. Those who helped bring about this superintelligence would be rewarded, and those who did not help when they knew they could have would instead have ten thousand clones of themselves simulated in a torture chamber by the superintelligence forever, a punishment many LessWrongers believe to be equivalent to being tortured themselves. This odd comp-sci reinterpretation of a Calvinist hell — one set inside a machine rather than a separate metaphysical realm — apparently gave several users panic attacks, and caused a flurry of moderation by Yudkowsky attempting to erase the concept from collective memory before any people, or hypothetical superintelligences, got any weird ideas. This strange panic incident has long been a source of embarrassment and mockery for the Rationalist community.

There are not many Deists around today. But we, the surrealists, have our own enemy we oppose: *realism*, the realists. This is what we call it today when people imagine something, some structure, and then forget that this is what they are doing, believing it to be something out in the world they hit their head against rather than something which has emerged from their mind. Scientific realism, philosophical realism, mathematical realism, political realism, corporate realism, we are not really fans of any of this.  A lot of people introduce us to a lot of charming ideas, we tell them we love it, we tell them we admire their creativity… but do you really believe this to be *real*? If they answer yes, we walk away nervously, we’re not sure we like where this is going anymore.

So for all the ideas critiqued in this text: they are lovely ideas, sure. They’re not *wrong*. We’re just saying they’re not *real*, like *that*.

Every system of thought has its historical origin point, and has its field where it applies, as well as its constraints, its limitations. But when a system is extrapolated to have an origin point before the beginning of time, like Deism, and then has its field extended to cover all things on the heavens and earth, this is when it becomes perverse, “a mill with complicated wheels”.

How far are we willing to go with this? Even in the case of physics? Yes, of course, even in the case of physics. Blake himself treats Newton as with almost as much scorn as John Locke. We think he put it quite succinctly when he described an atom as “A Thing That Does Not Exist”. Blake is of course correct, there are no atoms in the strict sense imagined by Democritus and Lucretius, given that the definition of an atom is a baseline unit of matter which cannot be further divided. Modern physics have found that the supposed atom are composed of subatomic particles, protons, neutrons, which are then themselves composed of even tinier particles, quarks. We don’t know how deep we will be able to keep dividing; we have every reason to believe there will be no bottom to the well. But in any case.

This is not the attitude of our opponents. There is an essay in which Yudkowsky emphasizes the aspect of Bayesian reasoning which demands nothing can have absolutely certain probability, even such a statement like 2 + 2 = 4 (there is an infinitesimal chance that the reasoner is somehow confused). Even the laws of physics cannot be said to hold with absolute certainty. So Yudkowsky asks — what is the chance that something has happened which violates the laws of physics?

This is an easy question: 100%. We know this to be true because Einstein’s observations violated the laws proposed by Newton, and now today we have two competing laws of physics, Einstein’s general relativity and quantum mechanics, which routinely violate each other. So how can anyone believe otherwise?

One only could if one believed that there exist a *real* law of physics, one which our incomplete laws are an approximation of, and this is the law which we are worried about violating. But where would this law be written? Inscribed by the deity somewhere, written in the computer code that defines the simulation we exist in, etc? It boggles the mind to attempt to place it. Often popular science paperbacks of the kind written by Hawking, etc., lapse into Deism when they get metaphysical. They talk about the moment when God wrote down the laws of physics in a time before time, etc.

All this can be made clearer if we exhume the dominant metaphor here; reveal what is going on in our imaginations, find the implicit poetry. People have started to talk about nature in a strange way. The “law” of phyiscs? This phrase is so commonplace we do not consider how strange it is. There is no actual *law* governing the motions of molecules, the molecules will not go to jail if they disobey the decree of some sheriff to keep following in straight lines unless adjusted. As such, it does not need to be written anywhere. It is just that, through observation, we have found that, at least in strictly controlled conditions, this seems to be what molecules always do. We have discovered enough of molecular behavior to make predictions which are nearly always accurate (and if not, it can be blamed on some mistake of the experimenter).

But why have we started to *imagine*, that, say, water always freezes at zero degrees Celsius because it is following some kind of orders from a cop, rather than this simply being what it does? This is the sort of poetry we have decided to introduce into everyday life, one where things happen only by restraint. We’re in a universe in which everything that happens does so under someone’s authority, nothing escapes the bull of the metaphysical sheriff. We will see that this type of gesture perhaps has deeper implications than initially appear.

Yudkowsky does not like this notion of physics as methods of systematic predictions stretching across limited domains — limited in the sense that general relativity works until it encounters the very small, and quantum mechanics works until it encounters the very large. On LessWrong, he has advocated for a hardcore form of metaphysical realism in his essays on quantum mechanics. Despite having no training in the field and being an autodidact, he bravely breaks down the arcane mathematics behind quantum mechanics in order to illustrate his point. His point has nothing to do with AI or reasoning in general, but he wishes to show the reader how Rationality can be the judge when *the scientific method is no longer enough* to arrive at correct conclusions. “So that’s all that Science really asks of you—the ability to accept reality when you’re beat over the head with it. It’s not much, but it’s enough to sustain a scientific culture,” Yudkowsky bemoans. “Contrast this to the notion we have in probability theory, of an exact quantitative rational judgment,” he says, emphasizing the superiority of Rationality.

The issue is that there are at least two frameworks through which to interpret the findings of quantum mechanics, which say something like: it is like the particle has passed through multiple parallel realities, each in which different events have occurred, and all these events play a role in determining the trajectory of the particle, even though none of them actually “happened”.

The Copenhagen interpretation is the interpretation of quantum mechanics that says: the math is the math. We know it works, but we can’t exactly find a way to explain anything beyond that in a way that is satisfying, we don’t know what quantum mechanics “really is”. The many-worlds interpretation is the interpretations which says: it appears that there are multiple parallel universes because there really are multiple parallel universes. Yudkowsky believes it is extremely important that people accept this realism as the correct interpretation, and if they do not it is out of a failure of reasoning, or some kind of fear.

Even though the two interpretations give the exact same predictions in practice, the one with an infinite number of simultaneous universes is a little overwhelming to accept. Some do not enjoy imagining these things. Though they could just as easily stop imagining them and there would be no consequences, Yudkowsky says they must go on doing so, for this is what the strict interpretation of the structure of quantum mechanics implies. “Bear this in mind, when you are wondering how to live in the strange new universe of many worlds: you have always been there,” he says, attempting to comfort those overwhelmed by the enormity of the infinity of realities they are suddenly aware surround them. What is notable is that Yudkowsky does not accept the obvious ethical implications of the multiverse theory, which would be that one’s decisions are of absolutely no weight, because all outcomes are equally likely to occur, and will. Instead, Yudkowsky bravely insists on fighting for a future where AGI is friendly. Here, an irrationalism enters, a moment of the will: I choose not to die, I choose to fight.

This is like Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita, confronted with Krishna displaying him the infinity of the dimensions of reality, and showing him that he is the man on the other side of the battlefield, just as much as he is himself Arjuna standing there. Nevertheless, even though Arjuna is fighting for nothing, since it all cancels out in the cosmic balance and fades before the splendor of the divine, he knows he must go on and fight.

To sum up this section, let us say that: we believe that a formal philosophical structure should be questioned in a manner which involves asking what the dominant metaphor is which allows it to be envisioned, while our opponents seem to have the opposite tendency: dial realism up as much as possible, interpret formal structures as a metaphysics that extend before and across time. These are fully completed systems that upon discovering: men must stand emptily within, and fear.
