## **Desire Encircled, Inscribed**
#### **(The Six Steps of the Blakean Critique)**

Let’s return to a Blake quote from *There is No Natural Religion*: “The desire of Man being Infinite, the possession is Infinite, and himself, Infinite”. This is something we will be forced to return to again and again. Man’s desire is infinite. As soon as you could place in front of someone the solution to all his problems, or everything he has ever wished to own in front of him in a platter like it was the happiest Christmas ever, he would be struck with a new desire, even if it is just to send you an expression of overwhelming gratitude, or to start playing with the toys you have given him.

Yudkowsky’s project for solving Alignment was for a while to determine humanity’s “Coherent Extrapolated Volition”, which in Yudkowsky’s words is “a goal of fulfilling what humanity would agree that they want, if given much longer to think about it, in more ideal circumstances”. If you could somehow describe the collective will of man, write it down, and program it into a superintelligent machine, Yudkowsky believes, then you open the gates to paradise. Proposed programs for finding Coherent Extrapolated Volition have included simulating thousands of years from now of human history in a supercomputer and hope that the virtual humans in the simulation have settled on something by the time the clock runs out, or perhaps we use neuroscience to look inside our minds to hope that our values can somehow be extracted from watching the chemical reactions in there.

“The bounded is loathed by its possessor, The same dull round even of a universe would soon become a mill with complicated wheels,” says Blake. Let’s focus on this notion of a *mill*. Perhaps Blake’s most famous lyric, from the poem *Jerusalem*, goes: “And did the Countenance Divine, Shine forth upon our clouded hills? And was Jerusalem builded here, Among these dark Satanic Mills?” Blake in his epic poetry is constantly describing a process through which various poetical figures transmute their repressed desire into a physical manifestation through industrial apparatuses: looms, furnaces, forges, mills.

Blake understands quite well something that many of those who live purely in abstractions do not: which is that systems of thought never arise, take off, without corresponding to a physical machine, whether one composed of machine parts, or a building’s architecture, or of humans ordered around by certain decrees. “Man has no Body distinct from his Soul”, and conversely, no soul distinct from his body, no desire separate from material production.

So then, what are the Satanic Mills? Blake’s relationship to Satan is is as unusual as is his relationship to Christ. When one reads Blake, he at times sounds like a fiery street-preaching Baptist, calling everything under the sun Satanic. But he has a very precise meaning of this concept unique to his own poetry, rather unlike the common one. Blake’s definition of Satan is: “the limit of opacity in man”. This is to say that by Satan, Blake refers to not some horned monster, but rather obscurity, lack of self-knowledge, and this specific type of blindness to one’s imagination we discuss above.

Blake‘s use of the term may seem strange, but he is getting this directly from the source — the Book of Job — in which Satan is introduced as the villain who attempts to sway Job away from his faith in God. The word “Satan” is a Hebrew term meaning “adversary”. This is a legal metaphor. If one was brought to trial in Israel in those days, a “satan” would be tasked with making the argument that you are guilty — Satan means “the prosecuting attorney”. Satan is repeatedly trying to convince God that Job will sway in his faith, but Job never abandons God. So Satan, properly speaking, is not some horned evildoer, but instead the voice in your head convincing you that you are guilty, condemned, not worthy of the love of God. Satan is the prosecuting attorney, whereas God is your defense. Satan is doubt. Satan is self-hate. Satan is the fear of God, from whom according to Blake, we have never had anything to fear.

Throughout this text, we will critique a number of formal systems. The Rationalists love formal systems, because certain conclusions derived from them can be shown to be exactly and precisely true. A formal system consists of a set of axioms, and then a set of rules for generating propositions within the system. Everything proven within a formal system, as within mathematics, is ultimately a tautology, and can be demonstrated beyond doubt, as long one agrees with the validity of the axioms.

But we look at formal systems with the same skepticism that Blake looks at Natural Religion. There is always some kind of imaginative work being done to generate the system in the first place. These systems are borne at a given moment because there is an event actually happening in the world to generate the spark of insight which allows a system to be formalized. But then, after the system’s formalization, man forgets the images and desires that swept through his intellect to generate the system, and imagines that the system was present before time began, as it becomes a tautology, and all tautologies hold in all possible worlds. To Blake, that moment of forgetting, and nothing else, is the work of Satan.

We are finally ready to formally define the Blakean Critique which is our method throughout this text. We can define a process of excavation which happens in six steps:

1. First, we must show where and why a system of thought originates. We must historicize it, we must describe how the formal system came from the imagination first to then be formalized, which is to say, we must discover the system’s initial referent in the world.

2. We then show that this corresponds to a specific “architecture”, a “factory”, a mill. One can only imagine the horror upon which the Englishmen of Blake’s generation would have felt when encountering the proliferation of factories in the early Industrial Revolution; chewing up and spitting out London’s poor, big black tarantulas dousing the sky with black inkjet clouds. Though ostensibly a factory is a machine for birthing textiles, or grain, or spare parts, or whatever it might be, to those on the ground it must have looked like a factory is a machine for producing more factories.

3. Then, we must show that that this factory presents a structure for desire which externalizes desire from the factory’s creator. If the factory is meant to fully represent its creator’s wishes, it soon nevertheless becomes “loathed by its possessor, the same dull round”. Its creator will still generate new wishes, but these are now secret sinister wishes, unable to enter the machine. There is a great Marxist text by one Christopher Caudwell called *The Crisis in Physics* which makes the argument that Newtonian physics — as a science in which it’s possible for man to view himself as detached from a world of atoms he can analyze objectively — is only possible to be conceived of in an era after the bourgeois start overseeing planned factories for the first time. The relationship between man and nature becomes the same as the factory boss and the workers he oversees. Nature becomes a mechanism which man merely observes, and does not participate in.

4. Next, we must show that in each case, these structures of desire do damage by encircling and inscribing desire, telling it there is no way out. It is all too easy to do this with the example of Newtonian mechanics. We have so many friends who have fallen into despair at a young age because they believed that they lived in a deterministic world composed of billiard ball atoms knocking around with precisely calculable trajectory, and felt that knowing this robs the world of all its poetry and purpose. We just want to shake them violently and say, you know, none of that is *real*! But it is difficult to cure someone who has been given a slow titration of poison his whole life.

5. After that, we must show that in each case, desire in practice actually escapes the factory. Blake in his works of lyric poetry: Songs of Innocence and Songs of Experience, contrasts hymns towards a tranquil childhood that a child should be able to expect in the former volume with the brutality of the Industrial Revolution in the latter, in which child labor was commonplace.“*Because I was happy upon the heath, And smil'd among the winters snow: They clothed me in the clothes of death, And taught me to sing the notes of woe. And because I am happy, & dance and sing, They think they have done me no injury: And are gone to praise God & his Priest & King Who make up a heaven of our* misery” is the song Blake puts in the mouth of a child chimney sweep. Though immiserated, there is hope here — because the child stuck in the factory continues to sing.

6. Finally, and crucially, we must show that if the breadth of man’s desire continues to be ignored and suppressed by the factory, we end up in the pathological case where the shape of the factory seizes the imagination in order to extend itself to all things. “The same dull round, even of a universe, would soon become a mill with complicated wheels”. A mill with complicated wheels: the factory needs to add more parts to itself and become more and more complicated the more its owner insists on replicating it everywhere it does not belong. This is the end result of realism, and it is essentially psychosis, machine-psychosis, the inability to even *conceive* of an escape from the factory’s plan. No matter where one looks, one sees the factory replicating itself in the patterns on the leaves in the trees, the clouds in the sky, like the dog faces in Google’s DeepDream.

In an earlier piece by Harmless titled *Utility Monster*, written around the downfall of FTX and Future Fund, we wrote an analysis of Sam Bankman-Fried’s utilitarian psychosis, which can serve as an illustration of the method of critique outlined above. Sam Bankman-Fried was a true philosopher-king, a devotee of the utilitarian school of morality present in the Rationalist subculture and Effective Altruism. It seemed to be the case that there was no sphere of life that SBF did not believe utilitarian morality could extend to. In theory, applying the utilitarian method would result in the most rational, calculated, efficient method of planning a company, but in practice, SBF’s life became an ignominious disaster of unprecedented proportions, a sordid story filled with sex and drugs.

To illustrate what went wrong, we can apply the Blakean Critique towards Effective Altruism. The subject of utilitarianism in particular will be treated in greater death in the chapter bearing its name, but briefly: utilitarianism emerges in a period of capitalist development when large-scale accounting becomes necessary, and it becomes possible to imagine a God that calculates the general good with the same method that an accountant uses to take stock of his inventory. The “factory” that utilitarian morality corresponds to is more and more accounting, bureaucratic bodies taking statistics, and so on. But there are all sorts of things the value of which cannot be accounted for by a bureaucratic body — one cannot account for, put a number on the value of, such as art, intimacy, friendship. Effective Altruism is step 6, the doubling down, the attempt to extend the structure of capitalist accounting to all spheres of life. Eventually — psychosis.

What we claim is: Rationalism, and its congregation of the Singularity, is a step-6 critical condition, realism gone way too far, now fallen off the cliff into insanity. Rationalism is the idea that when you assemble a number of formal systems together you get God, God-AI. What a thought to behold. There are a number of pieces to this puzzle, and we will have to tackle them one by one.