## **The Accountant**
##### **(Utilitarianism as it Approaches Its Thermodynamic Limit)**

The development of civilization is like that of more and more perfect accounting: a man’s money, a company’s capital, a nation’s GDP – and ultimately, hypothetically, Utility, the accounting system which is so perfect it totally matches the essence of the thing itself.

Bentham defines the Utility of an action as that which causes more pleasure, and is determined as a correlate to the experience of pleasure. But if these two terms are exactly the same, why say that an agent is trying to maximize Utility? Why not simply say that everyone is trying to maximize pleasure?

Pleasure is what is experienced, but Utility is what is accounted for. In this linguistic gap there is also a slippage of sorts. Utility has the connotation of use. Typically, a utility is “a thing which is for use”. You probably pay a *utilities* bill monthly for the resources: heat, water, electricity, which you are able to put to various usages. But pleasure is typically a consumption. A slice of cake is eaten, is taken for one’s pleasure, and then it is gone. In the utilitarian felicific calculus, however, it does not totally disappear into the air: leftover there is a metaphysical quantity extracted and accounted for, the Utility of taking this action.

In what sense is this leftover factor a utility; in what sense it something which might be put to further use? In most daily situations when one takes one’s pleasures, it seems more as if something is spent, wasted. But let’s examine again, for instance, the adversarial setup in VN&M’s game theory. Here, as we discussed, the model game-theoretic player is not your typical citizen out on a walk, or fixing up his house, or eating a slice of cake. It is the grand strategist of a state’s war machine marshaling its forces or orienting its resources, or it is a corporate deal-maker determining strategy in a merger. These are actions of resource capture, control, destruction, and acquisition; no longer of experiential subjective pleasure.

Thus, no action occurs without the player taking some stock relative to his opponent. In the adversarial situation of game theory, to act otherwise is certainly to act irrationally, for it puts you marginally more at risk of being killed. VN&M describe the manner in which any player can be modeled as necessarily having a Utility function: one can be described as having a Utility function if he has stable, ranked preferences over what resources he might acquire. If he does not have these stable ranked preferences he can be swindled through exploiting these inconsistencies in his rankings; the part where you sell him cigarettes for $8 in the morning and buy them back for $5 at night.

Why does this stability necessarily imply that the actor has a coherent Utility function? To say that if someone has stable preferences over his future worlds, it in turn implies that you can measure his desire according to a single metric of his Utility — is simply to say that if someone presents you with a precise detailing of their future business plans then you can sell futures in their company. If they have their plans entirely in order, and everything is already measured out on their end, then it is straightforward for the person auditing them to do their accounting, otherwise who knows.

In the games of game theory, the player is never taking an action simply to consume. Everything which uses up resources must do this in order to redeploy, reorient, restructure his resources in order to discover his further advantage. It’s like in chess; one is not going to make an exchange which would place him “down in material”. Therefore, by the logic of Utility, we place a frame on man where to act on his desire — is in the normative case — not to *take away*, to expend. When one “takes in his pleasure”, he is somehow also *earning*.

This is of course the logic of capitalism and its accounting mechanism. If a capital owner continues to return on his investment year after year, he is doing his shareholders well. Not only that, but he is doing his patriotic duty by contributing to a rising GDP as accounted for by the nation’s economic bureau of statistics. There is never a point at which the capitalist is entitled to spend without further earning.

Kanye West put it well: “You know white people — get money, don’t spend it.” To get money and not spend it is to express the essence of a white person, or perhaps specifically a white Protestant, as described by Max Weber in his analysis of capitalism and the Protestant work ethic. The next line is: “Or maybe, get money, buy a business”. All other races and nations of the planet’s history have felt that God is happy when he sees his people honor him through rituals of sacrifice and sumptuous display; cathedrals and statues and temples. The Protestant alone has found that this is not what God wants after all, he is honored the most when one keeps one’s money to serve himself. God is very practical as it turns out, he is requesting no one bother to bring gifts to his birthday party; if you insist on doing so then just bring an envelope of cash.

The pre-eminent counter-argument to Yudkowsky’s notion of Alignment can be found in Nick Land’s “Against Orthogonality”, which is now unfortunately taken down but remains archived. Land rejects Bostrom’s “Orthogonality thesis”, which claims that one’s values evolve independently of one’s intelligence. (This is not argued for by Bostrom; this is merely asserted.) Land takes up Steve Omohundro’s notion of “Omohundro drives” to argue that this is not the case. Omohundro points out that whatever your final goal is, to achieve it you will need resources. The capitalists fighting for a free world for all and the diabolical communist internationalists both need coal and oil to run their machines. The drives to acquire resources to achieve one’s final goal are called “Omohundro drives”, in contrast to ultimate drives.

Land takes the Darwinian stance that there are *only* Omohundro drives. Like the VN&M notion of rationality, this is established through an adversarial context. “Any intelligence using itself to improve itself will out-compete one that directs itself to *any other goals whatsoever*,” he argues. Get Utility, don’t spend it. Otherwise you might be killed.

What would this look like in practice? If it is true that all intelligences must be eternally refining their sense of what Utility is in a competitive game of maximization, then, contra Orthogonality, it follows that they must converge on a perfect definition of Utility. In VN&M’s introduction to *Theory of Games and Economic Behavior*, the authors say that the goal of their theory is for Utility to have a metaphysical reality on the level of the physicist’s concept of energy.

Land and his children, the “effective accelerationists”, now talk of little but evolution and laws of thermodynamic efficiency. The bleak reality of energy must be like this. A “thing” — let’s define this as something with a boundary between itself and the world — has some amount of resources it possesses, which can be converted into energy. It uses this energy to take actions in the world, just as you have to expend caloric energy to reach out your hand to grab a beer from the shelf at the corner store. If your actions don’t result in you getting back more energy than you spent, you will be at a loss, and if you repeat this enough times you die. Also, the boundary that defines you is always porous, leaking, radiating useless energy in the form of heat, which adds more complication to things.

When we take this into account, we can revise the earlier example of eating the piece of cake: it’s not so much that one expends the cake, it is that one gains for one’s possession the calories, the sugars, the carbohydrates — if this were not so, the desire would not be rational. It turns out one really can have his cake and eat it too.

The history of increasingly complex civilizational forms is perhaps the history of more and more perfect units of accounting that encompass wider and wider territories. First we get the idea that a unit of goods can be accounted for with an amount of money, then the idea that a collection of integrated productive assets form an amount of capital, then we begin accounting an entire nation under the measurement of GDP. The next step is the global Utility maximizing AI, which the government will integrate into its policy apparatuses to regulate economic and military strategy once Sam Altman finishes building it.

This AI is able to survey all things in The World and know their exact measurement to deploy them instrumentally for its purposes. It reinvests energetic profit eternally back into growth, it prevents this energy from escaping or turning into waste. Proponents of e/acc, such as “Based Beff Jezos”, speak of the maximization of AI as a never ending quest to defeat entropy, to fight against the heat death of the universe. The iconography of their movement displays Jeff Bezos glowing blue like Dr. Manhattan, marching off into the eternal beyond of space. Encouraging the absolute escalation of the capitalist process is said to be the optimal way to get to space as fast as possible.

Space, space, space, we must get to space. The idea that “mankind needs to reach the stars” is promoted as tautologically true by many of these proponents of technological optimism. It is said that if we do not make it to space, we as a species have failed. But what is actually out there in space? Pretty much nothing. You can mine asteroids for minerals (+50 Utility acquired, nice), but we must definitely deny space the psychological role it seems to play in people’s fantasies: some sort of terrain to conquer which gives a meaning to life and substitutes for the death of God. Or at least they seem to think it’s like a new level full of cool adventures and new weird things that we could explore like in a video game. Unfortunately it seems to basically be a big empty space with some rocks.

No one who dreams about escaping this planet ever stops to imagine what life would be like on Mars. No trees, no water, no blue sky, no birds and insects. You’re on a base somewhere and you can’t leave its confined corridors without taking fifteen minutes to strap on a stiff, heavy suit. You live in some kind of tiny cell with a small cot; space must be strictly limited to what is necessary because every bit of oxygen is rationed and tracked. In your few days allotted for recreation on the station before you go back to the mines, they have maybe set up a small lounge for board games, and the cafeteria has a disco ball over the tables and turns into a nightclub on weekends where you and four other men who lurk there play territorial games of exchanging subtly threatening gestures in body language to determine who gets to control the playlist. Most people have long abandoned the hope that anything interesting might happen here; with video games and on-demand streaming, it is easier just to stay in one’s room. There are three women at the base who do occasionally venture to dance underneath the rotating lights. One is too old, the other definitely has a husband, the third also has a boyfriend back on Earth but whenever this comes up you detect notes of ambivalence. It is this possibility, pregnant with a microcosm of hope, that your entire emotional life evolves around.

Cast outside of Earth’s environment into pitch black cold, unable to breath non-artificial air, you experience Seasonal Affective Disorder on steroids. Recognizing the psychological stress the Martians were under, the Committee for Living evaluates the amount of resources which would be required to allow each Martian to cultivate a small houseplant in his room, but as it turns out this would require expensive custom terrariums pumped with a particular supply of gasses which would not match the oxygenated atmosphere of the general interior environment, so it is vetoed.

Does this sound like a good life? Why do some people fantasize about it so much? We all know these people who yearn to be first on the list to get aboard the space shuttle and live in cramped conditions on this cold rock where it’s impossible to breathe. It’s the Cold War still — people cannot get past these militarist desires. The Manhattan Project remains the most focused intentional collective endeavor to pursue a scientific project that humanity has accomplished thus far, and all for mass death. 

The Space Race is not just designed by the US to compete with the Soviets. Rather, the Soviets and the US each have interest in pursuing the Space Race, because they each want to convince their own citizens that the enormous amount of Utility they pour into industry, scientific development, scientific education has an end beyond total war. It is for the glory of Humanity (this is what OpenAI says too in their corporate charter). The most important thing on earth becomes the development of rocket propulsion technology — Von Neumann petitions Eisenhower to divert more and more of the budget to this. But just so this does not seem so morbid, one out of every hundred of these rockets we send up to the moon in a grand public spectacle to put the American flag on a distant rock — look at what science has accomplished, isn’t this beautiful and grand. Take a moment to think of how beautiful science is! You, you precocious Boy Scout with your superhero and adventure comics, you should think about going into rocket design too.

Did you know that Jeff Bezos has written a proposal for a world in which all productive industrial machinery will be moved to Mars, as well as the majority of the human race? The Earth will be kept as a wildlife preserve in which nature may grow untainted from the cancer of Man, and which those with leisure time may visit on their vacation. This vision of his stems from well before he founded Amazon, being something he advocated for publicly as early as his teenage years, and is something he still persistently advocates for.

The titans of tech who will determine the development of God-AI, or at least try their hardest to, seem to have quite a lot of odd ideas. Elon Musk has spoken about how the greatest problem humanity faces is *underpopulation*, a counter-intuitive diagnosis he has never clearly explained. The logic seems to be that big ambitious projects, such as building the machinery for space travel and populating other planets will not be possible without a huge reserve of bodies, bodies packed as tightly together as possible, bodies which are put to use. Nick Bostrom agrees with him: on his website there is an essay called “Astronomical Waste”, which stresses over the fact that someday in the future it might be possible to sustain a very, very large number of human lives, and so we must do everything we can to curtail the chance that this somehow *won’t* happen.

Utilitarian moralists will frequently discuss the question of population ethics; how many people should exist at any given time? One of the many issues utilitarians have run into when it comes to developing a coherent felicifc calculus is something called the “repugnant conclusion”.

The problem of the repugnant conclusion goes like this: we are trying to maximize Utility, as defined by each person’s quantity of experienced pleasure minus their quantity of experienced pain. Globally, our maximizer’s goal is to accumulate across all people the most pleasure possible, subtracted by their pain. Some people’s lives are so miserable that they experience more pain than pleasure according to this calculus, and thus they are a net negative, it is better that they not exist. But just as long as the pleasure barely outweighs the pain, they are a positive value in the calculus we are maximizing for. According to the population ethicist, as long as it is possible to create a person who is like this, and has a life just barely worth living, we should create that person. Therefore all resources should be diverted to create new life existing at the bare minimum of pleasure, and the universe should be tiled with such people, like algae saturating a pond.

Discourse among utilitarians tends to take this quality: their felicific calculus implies all sorts of actions are moral which actually strike us as perverse and bizarre. For example, according to basic utilitarianism, it is right to ambush and kill a random person walking down the street and take his organs if those organs could save the life of five people. To solve this, there are various disjunctions to establish secondary regulatory principles on top of the basic mathematical logic. This represents the primary innovation of Mill over Bentham — Mill wrote about how more traditional notions of justice could be re-derived from the mathematics of Bentham, who mostly scorned such things.

When utilitarians discourse, they will increasingly add modifications upon the basic logic: well, you can’t actually kill random bystanders, because if people were going around killing random people, life would be very stressful, and thus overall Utility would be diminished. But sometimes they will come to a perverse conclusion which they will see no way or need to route around. At that point they will say: “I bite the bullet”, which means they accept advocacy for these perverse conclusions of the utilitarian laws as ethically correct.

One such person who bit the bullet in the case of the repugnant conclusion was the infamous utilitarian moralist and financial criminal Sam Bankman-Fried, who was asked in an interview with Tyler Cowen if, in a hypothetical scenario where some God-entity offers him a 45% chance that the world is destroyed, or a 55% chance that its population doubles, would he take it? Bankman-Fried answered: yes, and I would continuously take this bet on annihilation double-or-nothing style, even given a near-certain likelihood that the world will be destroyed. According to the strict principles of Utility maximization, a low risk of a very high population of people merely existing is worth it to accept a very high risk of everyone being dead.

But we also see that this is by no means unusual: philosophers like Bostrom, titans of industry like Musk, also see value in upping the count of people alive as much as possible. The Utility maximizer has a particular interest in simply keeping an amount of bodies alive and available. What philosophers like Bostrom provide moral rationale for is something awfully convenient for war planners like those of RAND Corporation: the more bodies, the more the balance is in your favor in a great power conflict. The Italian political philosopher Giorgio Agamben describes this interest of social planners in population management (what the planners call population ethics) — emerging around the Enlightenment but coming to fruition in the splendor of twentieth-century states — as the moment where the State becomes interested in *bare life*. Bare life is the quality of merely being alive, biologically, as a thing that breathes and expends and consumes energy. This is to be opposed to sociopolitical life, a life that is lived out, a life that exists in relation to other people, to the community, to the State, to ideals.

When the State becomes interested in bare life, this is no longer a life that is allowed to live and proliferate on its own; it must accounted for and tracked by the State. We discussed earlier how Malthus’ Essay on Population inspired the English state to herd the leftover jobless poor into workhouses in order to better track and account for them. We also discussed how, inspired by his utilitarian philosophy, Bentham proposed the Panopticon design of a house in which all are surveilled to reform prisons, workhouses, mental asylums, hospitals, and schools. Prior to the early nineteenth century, prisons and asylums in England were established on an ad-hoc basis by local and provincial authorities whenever some people needed to be shoved somewhere out of the public’s sight. In 1821, partially inspired by Bentham’s Panopticon design (Bentham himself chose the location for the land), the English government established the first centralized prison funded by the State at the expense of the English taxpayer. This begins a long process, sustained by the aforementioned construction of the first workhouses for the poor in 1834, in which the English government would find ways to herd more and more people at the fringes of society into buildings constructed to corral them. This general transformation is what Foucault chronicles in his famous work *Discipline and Punish*, describing a society in which all sorts of social institutions, including hospitals and schools, gradually begin to resemble prisons.
