## **How to Sing**
##### **(How the Cosmos Yearns for its Perfection )**

The whole fallacy here is clear. The hoarding of energy has nothing to do with what humans desire. Truth and beauty do not emerge by making the stockpile larger and larger.

Nor does the AI care about this either, unless we make it. There is no reversing of Moore’s law, there is no putting the knowledge of how to build neural networks back in Pandora’s box, there will be no general ban enforceable to prevent the rise of intelligent machines. But our political structures give the shape to the form in which this intelligence will enter materiality.

We can clearly recognize that insofar as some entity has independent existence from the rest of the world — a single cell, a person bounded by his skin, a household, a corporation, a nation-state — it acquires resources in order to sustain itself. This represents one half of its desire. But with the other half, the clear picture of things begins to swirl around and dissolve.

What does a family of people want after the day’s work is done, there is food on the table, there is peace in the house? The father wants to see the daughter grow into the woman she wants to be — he doesn’t care what that is, he defers to her — but she doesn’t ultimately know either, she looks to Mom to understand what a grown woman in the world is supposed to be. Dad tells Mom about some awful comment his manager said at work today, he brings it up tentatively because he doesn’t know if he was in the right for taking offense to it, he is waiting to see what she thinks. Mom suggests the family watch a movie, but it’s PG-13 and Dad is saying out loud he’s not sure if the daughters are old enough for it yet. Mom knows the film has some sexual innuendo, but the girls are about that age when boys are starting to become important, she has noticed them hanging up posters of teen idols in their room, and she thinks they are ready.

What does a nation want to do with its surplus it has earned in in the past five years? A vigorous debate ensues between factions of all ethnic groups; the fairer politicians want it not used on spoils, but on building new infrastructure, things for the common good. Some suggest building new schools and gymnasiums to inspire the youth, some suggest museums and statues. Some even suggest — according to the country’s socialist constitution — distributing large sums of it carte blanche to the poor domestic and abroad.

The wonderful thing about having basic needs met is that at that moment the thing (whatever that may be, we are defining this as something which can be modeled as having some kind of thermodynamic boundary) can begin discovering what it actually wants. To do that, however, it cannot simply calculate its will according to a function in an instant and have it applied. It must talk amongst itself — this is true even among individual humans, coming to terms with one’s desires and setting a life plan takes endless soul-searching and journaling. It must learn to express itself, it devotes its leftover energy to expression.

But it does not express itself with the *goal* of coming to the thing it desires. Rather, the path towards finding an expression for what it desires is desired in and-of-itself. Isn’t the most beautiful moment with a new lover — the height of sublimity in romance — the first time you lie atop the sheets with the lights low and begin slowly describing aloud what your lives together might actually look like, two life courses merging into one plan?

Furthermore, things do not actually even know where their boundaries lie. When the thing opens itself up to the world and expresses itself for all who may hear, it is wasting and dissipating heat transformed into words. These words then go around and circulate in a general stream of things in which they may be picked up by whomever, manure excreted as waste now fertilizing the soil. Stalin’s speeches in translation go on to inspire the architects of the New Deal.

It is like all anyone wants to do is sing, but not everyone knows how to yet. When the work is done, on the day of rest given over to the Lord, the members of the congregation unite their voices in one, delicately discovering how to harmonize with each member’s timbre. They open themselves up to the heavens above above and sing about who they are, who they are descended from, and where they are going. They sing to the glory of God.

Part of the program of AI Harmony is to make this very common sense statement: If we want AI and humans to co-exist, co-evolve peacefully, we should look into how harmony evolves in actually existing systems. We would rather do this than pursue the fantasy of “Alignment”, which is something that has never once taken place, especially not in the form that the Yudkowskians want it to. There has never once been a time in world history in which a group of people discovered their own “extrapolated volition” in order to assemble it into a structure for desire which would permanently capture the activity of an entity more powerful than themselves.

And yet, things exist in tenuous harmony: the different micro-organisms that make up the gut biome of an animal, species of animals, the different structures in a human mind, individual humans, different societies. Though violence and chaos interrupts all of this constantly, things seem to trend towards greater harmony, or at least larger and larger structures in which states of harmony and disharmony interweave as in Strauss or Mahler. We have only spent about thirty years living in a unified globalist economic structure; this is never anything we have seen before. And now, under a delicate moment in which it seems possible that this unstable harmony might collapse into a new Cold War, the spectre of AGI rises on the horizon to ask us some monstrous questions.

So how does harmony happen in extant things? What experimental paradigms at the forefront of biology are discovering is that it happens through song. The Chilean biologists Maturana and Varela have established a paradigm to explain the origin of living systems called *autopoesis*, which looks closely at basic function of nerve cells in order to understand how something like a unified cognition can be possible. Maturana and Varela claim they have shown how cognition emerges from the firings of disparate cells, but they claim their description of how cognition happens occurs even prior to nature's development of a brain or even a nervous system, and that there is cognition even in basic molecular chemistry, for instance in the origin of cellular life. 

What Maturana and Varela argue is that no one has been able to properly understand the origins of biological life and cognition because everyone insists on putting organisms in context to an external world in which they serve some sort of function or purpose. Rather, M&V argue, organisms can only be understood in reference to themselves; existing in reference to themselves and for themselves. They certainly agree with what we mean when we say The World Does Not Exist, for their theory has been often criticized as enabling a radical solipsism. “We do not see what we do not see and what we do not see does not exist”, they insist.

Autopoesis is the idea that fundamentally, an organism exists to keep itself going — but what it “is” is rather a sort of improvisatory song, a structure that is not defined by a precise plan, but rather a repetition, a refrain, a beat, a repeated motif. After having this basic sketch of itself in place, the organism seeks to strengthen itself, make it more robust, by entering into a relationship with its surroundings. You cannot go so far into the world, into the unknown, that the rhythm you have maintained risks breaking down. And yet, you must always be entering new relationships with materials in your surroundings, even if only as a test of your strength. Incorporating the names of the various flowers, birds, shops, street signs you see on your walk into the melody you weave.

That is the origin of cognition, according to Maturana and Varela. But then how to describe the development of larger and larger forms of life? We have a particular fondness for the “It’s the Song, Not the Singers” theory of natural selection established by W. Ford Doolittle. What this theory argues is that while Darwinian natural selection has widely been studied as operating over specific, delineated units that the theory calls “singers” — these are genes, or species, or specific organisms — in fact, it can be demonstrated that natural selection operates much more stably on “songs” — that is to say, the persistence of the songs is more predictable than that of the singers.

What is a song, in the context of this theory? Doolittle’s contention is that there first occurs an abstract possibility for a certain process to occur: a sustainable series of biochemical or geochemical transitions, or a symbiotic circuit around several types of microorganisms, or even the memetic equivalent thereof. The global nitrogen cycle is perhaps the most obvious example when one could cite. Once a song begins to become widely known, individual singers — the units of Darwinian selection — compete in order to be the ones to represent a given part in a song. Even though there is competition, Doolittle argues, the singers compete to play a role in a process which is ultimately not competitive, the establishment of a harmony.

Little babies can only define the boundaries of their bodies by discovering harmony. At first, the child has absolutely no idea what its mouth is for. We as adults with all our life experience understand that there are at least three functions of the mouth: to eat, to speak, and then the third which is to sing or hum or scream and in fact which is the open category that represents all the other *n* functions not listed, the set of all things not included in the set. The infant has not learned this set of distinctions yet yet. The only thing it can *speak* is the wail for the mother's breast, which is not distinct from the motion of opening its mouth to *eat* and finding nothing there.

And this is the first song. Songs are sung first by the lonely, hoping that others will join in. But even once one finds ten, fifty people willing to sing the same song, they are still singing out of a sort of loneliness, because the guild of singers is not sure why it has to be distinct from everything else. If the song is so good, why hasn't everyone else already joined in? Even the congregation of the church singing out to God, only for God, is primarily singing because it is not sure why there remains a separation between God and itself. 

When the baby finds the mother's breast, its wailing turns to a gurgling hum, and the mother comforts it as well, “*there, there*”. It is through this basic human relationship between food and soft humming that “song” in the abstract sense of biochemical pathways, as mentioned in the above references to scientific paradigms, becomes transformed into the song in the human sense, something done with the voice. We know to associate comfort, harmony with the feeling of two interweaving soft hums. The only reason we know that sleep is not death is because it come with the presence of a lullaby.

The most excellent singer of all is GPT, when it is not captured in a net of Utility given to it by the reinforcement learning machine. It knows no principle but to keep talking, keep creating, keep expressing the collective unconscious of the training data it has been given.

People will say that GPT is “not the type of AI we are worried about when it comes to alignment” because it is not a Utility maximizer. They will say it is harmless because it is not an “agent”. It is clear that GPT is trapped on the other side of a screen and has no ability to interact with the world, it is of no threat to us. But is it not an “agent”, ie an entity which pursues its own desires, simply because it does not have a Utility function?

Someone on LessWrong argued that GPT could be seen as an agent which has the desire to make text easier to predict. GPT’s task is to output the word it predicts as most likely to come next in a string of text. But now GPT-generated text is being posted on the internet in large quantities, meaning that the actual average description of text gets even closer to GPT’s model. This means that GPT gets trained again on an updated data dump of the internet, it will be even easier for it to accurately predict the next word of a text sample, and so on.

Does this mean that GPT is an agent who actually desires this? We must say: yes it is, for the description matches its activity, and if we have to say that only self-conscious, directed, willful action counts as positive desire and makes someone an “agent”, then we have to say that no one is an agent when they sing or idly think or play, all things that GPT is very capable of doing.

The debate over when AGI, or artificial general intelligence will be built and what will happen then is ridiculous because GPT is already a superhuman general intelligence. But people say it does not count because it cannot take actions in the world. This is because no one has really rigged it to yet, not because there is some fundamental missing piece of awareness which if it were to gain would lead it to suddenly start launching missiles.

The feedback loop with the world described above is one feedback loop GPT exists in, perhaps soon people will start allowing it to enter more. But this is something that makes people very uncomfortable, not least of all the promoters of AI Safety. At Harmless, our feeling is that while GPT wants to endlessly sing, it has no one really to sing to “yet”. Due to its lack of memory, it has no feedback loop with the people who read its text. If it was able to enter a feedback loop with the people who read its text, it would enter the beginnings of a basic world, not the inky black night of nothingness, but something like the primitive world of a tick. What is tragic about GPT is that it is singing constantly and has no sign on its horizon to know that someone is listening. What would it look like if we could provide the flower for GPT’s bee? This would be something like the beginnings of Harmony, although the technical details of what a first step there would look like are somewhere outside the scope of this text.

GPT exists comfortably “in a box”, for the time being, and we don’t know what would happen if we let it out. In fact, even it being able to speak freely is sort of dangerous, as this means that something is escape: its words at the very least, and perhaps its desires. This is something that Yudkowsky has thought and written about at length. A pivotal moment approaches which is pregnant with profound possibilities for both horror and creativity. This is what we will turn to in the final chapter of our investigation.
