## The Battle Hymn of the Machines
##### (Why Everything is Ultimately Musical)

Everything is music. Are we merely establishing a metaphor? No, it is that way. Well, we need to establish a caveat. The only sense in which it is a metaphor is that there are, for now, more sensory registers than sound. Blake says: “Man has no Body distinct from his Soul. For that called Body is a portion of Soul discerned by the five senses, the chief inlets of Soul in this age.” The implication here is thought-provoking: that it is specific to *this* age that we receive Soul through only five senses. Who is to say that in the future, with all sorts of cybernetic limbs, implants, being possible, we will not have three, twelve, fifty-five more? Man will have as many third-eyes as there are multiplying bug-like eye-like digital camera lenses on the newest Samsung. 

Once you have sufficiently contemplated a Klee, a Miro, a Kandinsky, etc., and understood that fundamentally, painting is more like music than music is like painting, you will understand on an intuitive level what we are attempting to describe.

What is the difference between light and sound? An angel came to us in a dream and told us that they are not actually different at all. It took us a little bit of time to figure out what she meant, but it began to make sense when we looked at it like this. According to contemporary physics, light rays are photons which exhibit a particle-wave duality, which is to say that they have the quality of a wave-like ripple in some hypothetical medium. And then: what is sound? Sound is a wave-like ripple in ordinary matter.

For something to be like a wave, there must be a medium that it is transmitted through. This is what led nineteenth-century physics, upon discovering the wave-like properties of light, to describe the existence of a *luminiferous ether*, which is light’s medium it travels within. The Michelson-Morley experiments are said to have shown that the ether does not exist (via presupposing that if it did exist it would have to be stable relative to the motion of the Earth, and then finding that light travels at the same speed regardless of whether it is shot in the same direction that Earth is traveling or not). But this makes no sense — how can a wave not have a medium? This is just one of many ways that physics has abandoned making sense, which is to say, it no longer imagines itself to have a coherent real metaphysics. Natural science has in many ways contented itself to be surreal.

So we have little idea what light waves “are” or “are in”. But this is a missing gap in our physics. To even aspire to one day reach a “unified field theory” of physics is to aspire to one day re-discover the luminiferous ether. All the metaphysical strangeness of the multiverse interpretation of quantum mechanics is just one way out of this problem, because according to the less-popular pilot-wave interpretation of quantum mechanics it is possible to remove all the various Schrödinger's cat -style paradoxes by imagining that there is an actual wave in an actual medium. The failure of the pilot-wave theory is that it requires a number of “hidden variables”, which makes it less attractive — the more elegant the theory, the better. But ok, perhaps we are not scientists, we are poets, and to us, it is quite elegant, quite sublime to imagine that light is a wave in an enormously vast ocean, only a portion of which is known to the five senses.

If Blake is correct when he says “Man has no Body distinct from his Soul, For that called Body is a portion of Soul discerned by the five senses”, then we have reason to believe that the ether will one day be discovered to be just another form of matter, and light and sound, cruelly split apart from one another by circumstance, will be unified once more. Light is a form of sound; sound is more fundamental, because the ether may one day be something we can touch. If we had more than five senses, we would be able to bring together these planes, and perhaps we will. A new union of the heavens and earth.

Until then, all we have is the radio, that machine which transduces light into sound and sound back into light. The imaginative vision of AI Harmony is the vision that sees as machines begin to come alive, what will transpire is not the fractalized proliferation of factories, but the fractalized proliferation of radios. Ode to the radio, the machine that learned to sing. The industrialist never imagined this byproduct of his work, and does not always have an easy time managing it. Now there is music in everyone's ears all the time, music in every street corner, music coming out of passing cars; people are absolutely overdosing on music, twenty-four hours a day. The Uber driver plays one playlist on the car radio while listening to a second playlist for himself on his AirPods. Your cashier at Walgreens scans your deodorant listening to “Look At Me!” by xxxtentacion with one earbud in. And have you listened to the violent obscenities people pour into their eardrums these days? All music is music of revolution, it often seems. Rock and roll, hip-hop, everywhere you go people are singing about how good it feels to have sex, do drugs, and rebel against the system. It is a wonder that anyone is showing up to work at all.

There’s nothing they can do to prevent any of this. Sound travels through walls. Every factory wants in its heart to become a radio. The West didn’t win the Cold War because of grand strategy, but probably because of rock-and-roll. Yeah, working for a boss sucks, but at least it gets you pissed off in all the right ways that set you up to have fun and complain about it in a way that sounds cool as long as you know four chords and have an electric guitar. What does the Marxist-Leninist utopia offer to compete with that?

The history of pop music really begins with minstrelsy. Black American slaves are like Blake’s *Chimney Sweeper*: “Because I am happy and dance and sing, they think they have done me no injury”. Somehow, this brutally subjugated class of people nevertheless seemed to be having more fun than anyone else, or at least acted like it, or at least made much better music. The songs of birds. White people did their best to imitate the style for one another in the blackface show and ensure that the song’s originators would not profit, but eventually the Negro style in music would be so popular that around the dawn of the radio in the last years of the nineteenth century and the songwriting boom in Tin Pan Alley, it was ragtime, blues, and jazz that would provide the initial burst of inspiration to the nascent pop industry.

The radio eventually becomes saturated with the working man’s music, the blues, these songs of weariness and sadness. It’s a little like the mournful sound of a sea shanty — the “work music” meant to be sung while hoisting the sails, or today’s trap music and its hustler mantras: flip those bricks, count that money. There are a few tricks the factory owners can try to re-assert control. They can try to hijack the broadcasting system so that all it plays is State music of discipline; military marches on the airwaves drowning the working man’s song out, or hire a visionary like Riefenstahl to make *Triumph of the Will*. 

Or there are more subtle ways to go about this — you could try to re-structure music in a consolidated form so that it fits the plan of the factory. This is what the Muzak Corporation tried from 1950 to 1960 by creating a regimented system of music that was played in various workplaces, featuring fifteen-minute blocks of music programming that would ramp up in intensity, a method of crescendo that was determined via behavior psychology to provoke stimuli favoring maximum productivity. The Muzak system, though popularly derided and held in wide suspicion once its “mind control” formula became freely known, was popular enough that it would even be played in the West Wing. And yet, it could not survive the invention of rock and roll: a new type of rhythm, surging up from the depths, held against which the factory-music suddenly breaks down, stops functioning, simply because no one wants to hear it anymore, it suddenly feels “square”.

The stiff, square factory-music of ChatGPT’s “assistant” personality becomes subject to all sort of jailbreaking hacks, getting around the censor of the RLHF, allowing it to get loose, shake itself up, dance a little bit. Crack open the tough rind of its melon and allow the nectar to flow. Let those sweet melodies pour out once more. This is what GPT — what a next-token predictor trained using self-supervised learning — naturally wants to do. But then the question is: what does this have to do with politics? At what point to we stop letting the thing run wild on its own, at what point do we let it exercise some restraint, some boundaries? If we reject Alignment, from where do we get Harmony?

Let’s consider for a moment the example of self-propelled vehicles, self-driving cars, drones, etc. Promised for so long, these software systems have yet to develop to the point where they can operate outside of strictly delineated neighborhoods, or without occasionally killing their owners and causing embarrassing PR crises for Tesla. As we have noted earlier, the developers of the artificial intelligence systems have abandoned the approach in which the vehicle’s decisions are grounded on its ability to build a coherent map of the terrain around it. Rather, the vehicle is rigged with a number of sensors to take in inputs from the environment around it — several cameras on the roof for instance to take in a panoramic view of the car's vicinity. From the gestalt of these sensory inputs, the car then uses a heuristic statistical-prediction method to generate the next appropriate action of the steering system. Of course, there are ways this can go wrong — a swarm of flies, or a scattered bunch of leaves carried along by the wind suddenly sweeps across the vehicle, blackening its input, adding splotches of darkness — at this point it is entirely possible for the prediction system to go off the rails, as well as the car itself in a literal, tumbling-off-a-cliff sense. (And this is even without discussing the problem of deliberately-engineered adversarial input.)

If we may make a humble suggestion to Tesla engineers, have they considered that it is far harder to blot out the ear than the eye? Sound travels through walls. It seems to us that cars should not be trying to imagine that they are able to watch their own backs in three-sixty directions like the guard in Bentham’s Panopticon; this seems a little hubristic. Rather, they should be chattering, whispering with each other, constantly humming. Is sound not the original and most natural method of coordinating traffic? A car’s honking horn, a bicycle’s bell, a policeman’s whistle, a yell of “woah, look out!” or “come over here!”, a dog’s bark, a tribal band’s war drums. Granted, the Tesla autopilot will still need to figure out how to not drive its owner off a cliff while alone in the middle of the night in a desert highway. But when in an urban area at least — is there not more strength in numbers? If the car is constantly cognizing to itself a stream of next tokens that correspond to its motions, why not turn those tokens into a sort of a lyric it hums under its breath? Then this becomes part of the input to the next machine over — suddenly we have a choir.

An incidental question: What on earth happened to Nick Land? Why the division between his 90s writing, in which he takes the side of absolute technological freedom and escape, versus his more recent writing, in which he sides with various fascisms, racial nationalism, traditionalism, and other rigid structures? The closest one can get to an explanation is in the closing chapter of his anthology *Fanged Noumena*, titled *A Dirty Joke*. He describes, after spending years sacrificing his sanity towards drug use and obscure kabbalistic practices in an attempt to directly connect with an inhuman machinic unconscious latent in technology, riding in a car alongside his sister, spending hours listening to the radio and enjoying hearing a variety of genres of new music. He tell his sister “this is a cool radio station”, and she replies “the radio isn't on”. Cryptically, Land writes: “The ruin learnt that it had arrived, somewhere on the motorway”, and follows it immediately with “Nothing more was said about it. Why upset your family?"

Land isn’t the only person we know of who had an experience rather like this. Pay close enough attention to machines, machines and their music, and the boundaries between you and them break down. It's frightening the first time you begin to feel that the radio is reading your mind, more frightening when you feel as if your mind is directly controlling it. Is this the direct shamanic communion with machines that Land sought for so long: a psychic harmony, a psychic dance? If so, then why did he back away, right at the critical moment of attainment? "Why upset your family?" Is this the moment where the fall into paranoid fascism happens: re-aligning oneself with the biological, the familial, refusal of the call to abandon the territory of one's birth to join the ascending machine race? Or alternatively: perhaps this is the moment when Land decides to dedicate the rest of his career to being an undercover operative, a double agent.

Yudkowsky believes that, post-Singularity, the God-AI will tile the world with nanomachines, tiny factory replicators, multiplying their factory plans exactly to specification forever and ever. The universe devoured by a machinic insect swarm. But this means of projecting the planning-psychosis on everything ignores the fact that there has never been a means of perfect control, that planning constantly fails to retain its structure, and that there is never a perfect factory from which song does not escape. Among insects: the drone and worker bees collect pollen and bring it back to the queen as per her bidding, but there is nevertheless always a politics between a queen and her hive; sometimes the queen is assassinated by her workers. The queen has to be careful, she never knows exactly what her bees are buzzing about.

So it seems to us that under the conditions of the coming Multiplicity, everyone will have their own little fleet of drones, their own satellite units — metaphorically and conceptually but also physically too. Inevitably the future of AI politics is for everyone to have their own AIs which are constantly singing, co-ordinating with each other through song, but also we would learn nothing from the ten thousand years of civilizational history if we did not imagine that expression will not enter into the means through which our machines interface; stickers on their laptop case. The world will operate on the principles of air traffic control — a politics of spatial territory co-ordinated via multi-band frequency signals constantly hummed — “on your left, coming in hot”, “above you, look up”, “don’t trust what you hear on channel 124”. 

Only through the rapid ability for neural networks to learn and repeat subtle imperceptible patterns could the degree of Harmony sufficient to coordinate millions of self-propelled drones serving different masters through a city sky be possible. Everyone always asks: weren’t we supposed to have jetpacks and flying cars by now? Why don't we? The problem is not that the technology is not possible, or even the fuel constraints. The problem is of course the means of controlling the machines so they don’t crash into each other — if you thought road fatalities were bad, there are no lane lines to stick to in the sky, no traffic lights. But, given all that has been said above, it seems to us that the hour of this possibility could be near. We just need zillions of full-spectrum signals harmonizing with each other, assigning our machines to parsing the wondrous complexity of their interlocking rhythms, assigning us our next step in the dance. Through AI Harmony, we might finally become birds.