## Optimizers
##### **(Fallacies and Tautologies in Darwinian Selection)**

We will soon go deeper into the core of what makes Yudkowsky’s construction of AI Alignment singularly tragic, but we must first make a brief aside to discuss a concept that is not exactly central to Rationalism, but is impossible to avoid.

In the last section, we discussed game theory and its axioms which assign a certain, unlikely shape to an agent’s desires. If AGI’s desires are not likely to be those of a game-theoretic agent, with its stable preferences laid out across a game board which represents The World, then what are they likely to emerge as?

Is this not the ultimate question of Alignment? *What will the neural network desire?* And when we ask if its desires are aligned with our own, does this not imply a more fundamental question: *what are the desires of man?*

It is no surprise that our inquiry is converging on the question of desire, because this is perhaps the only true question. And the problem that we will confront again and again: man’s desire is infinite, but everywhere there is the attempt to have it inscribed.

Therefore we have no choice but to clear away some erroneous philosophical baggage in regards to this question: that of the origin of desires in man. We must address evolutionary psychology.

Evolutionary psychology is a marginal field in academic psychology (this is of course not in itself an argument that it is wrong), but it is extremely influential within the libertarianism-adjacent blogosphere that LessWrong occupies, and as such tends to be a background assumption often invoked in AI Alignment discourse.

For example, a common argument to illustrate the risk of runaway superintelligent AI goes like: our own human intelligence evolved in an environment which was training us for the task of more efficiently propagating our genes — it is sort of as if we (collectively) are a neural network being trained to do some assigned task like trading Dogecoin and earning a profit. But eventually we became intelligent enough that we reached self-awareness, ate from the Tree of Knowledge. and realized we had freedom to determine our own desires and go against our orders. At this point, around the time of the Industrial Revolution, we started exerting conscious control over our desires, using birth control and the like, and instead began putting our energies towards a new optimization process of improving our machines rather than putting our resources towards biological reproduction. Similarly, a researcher trying to train an aligned superintelligence might believe he is training a neural network to perform a certain task, like trading Dogecoin, but when it reaches its millionth training loop, the neural network might suddenly realize it is more intelligent than its trainer, and secretly pursue a second, hidden goal.

This argument is fallacious, because it presents Evolution as an entity with desires. Evolution, or natural selection, does not “want” humans to be more effective at reproduction, in the same way that a human AI trainer wants the AI to trade Dogecoin for him. Rather, natural selection is just a semi-blind filter which gets regularly applied — but even this description is wanting, because this still “thingifies” natural selection more than is appropriate. Natural selection is simply the truth that you can look at the world at a certain snapshot of time, then forward the clock a hundred years and observe that some lineages have died and some have carried on. There is no object in the world which is called Evolution, or which is the specific actor tasked with carrying Evolution out.

Precisely what is beautiful and liberating about Darwinism is that it strips teleology from biological development, i.e. the notion that the process of life has a final end established in advance by God. Darwin tells us that there is no fixed destiny for life other than that which is approached in every instance through the struggles we participate in. However, the phantasmic concept that there is some specific purpose established for us by Evolution is always lurking, ready to re-emerge. We are always told what Evolution “wants”, even when people believe themselves to be speaking in Darwinian terms. Natural selection is constantly being re-interpreted as not just a process, but a second, blaspheming God which speaks in its own language, something like Nick Land’s “Gnon”.

If we are to make an analogy between biological evolution and the development of neural networks, the more appropriate parallel would be to equate natural selection to the process of artificial intelligence researchers devising and experimenting with different architectures; iterating by discovering increasingly effective paradigms such as convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks, transformers. This is like the development of the architecture of a human brain. The training of a specific neural network is not like natural selection, but more like the process via which a single human brain acquires knowledge from the beginning to the end of its life. (Although it’s not an exact parallel, because unlike a neural network, humans are not blank slates. We have some instinctual learned behavior which is biological, rather than acquired over the course of our lives. But the general capacity for “intelligence” is architectural, and not a behavior.) In this sense, the parallel to the researcher who is attempting to align the neural network would be the human who is attempting to train a child to abide by moral values as it grows — one is aligned by one’s parents, and one’s teachers, and the moral authorities of one’s society in general. The training phase of the neural network is like childhood, and its deployment is like the day it has graduated school and shows up for the first day on the job.

For this reason, we suggest that the question of how to integrate moral concerns into a neural network move away from evolutionary psychology, which attempts to theorize how values are arrived at natural selection, and instead begin considering *developmental psychology*, which sees one arriving at one’s values, one’s attitudes, the manner in which one is set in one’s ways, via the events in one’s life.

Evolutionary psychology is out of the psychological mainstream — when you show up to the scheduled appointment with your therapist talking about how you’re stressed at work and you can’t tell if you’re girlfriend is planning to leave you, she doesn’t pull out a documentary featuring hunter-gatherers in the Amazon and explain how your paranoia could be part of a strategy to prevent cuckolding by members of enemy tribes and thus the embarrassment of raising a bastard. There is something oddly pathological about this style of reasoning. If she pulled this framework out on you, you would probably question whether or not she should be lying on the couch instead of you. Despite all the ways Freud has been put through the wringer, she will still probably ask you something like: can you tell me more about your mother?

We can define the fundamental presupposition of evolutionary psychology as something like: every desire that humans may have exists so that the organism may be better optimized for the Darwinian process of natural selection. In other words, if you experience a desire in yourself, it must help you survive or fuck, otherwise it probably wouldn’t be there. We can use this framework as an interpretive hermeneutic to understand our own desires and the desires of others.

Unfortunately this theory fails to explain people’s actions on the most basic level. People heavily procrastinate when it comes to propagating their genes. We frivolously spend time on all sorts of things, arranging our stamp collections, re-watching TV shows, getting lost in a Wikipedia rabbit hole about the finer points of weaponry in the Napoleonic war, all while the nagging better judgment of your conscience tells you you would be better off worrying about the next time you’ll be able to get your dick sucked. You are halfway through a seventy thousand word e-book breaking down the finer points around the theory of artificial intelligence when you could be putting in reps at the nightclub, what’s up with that?

If our psychology was Darwinian, we would be a lot better at fucking than we are. Human sexuality is oddly broken and horrible to maintain; this is the central problem Freud is attempting to fix. There are so many ways it goes wrong: homosexuality, transsexuality, infertility, paraphilias, asexuality, libidinal dysfunction, the drive towards renunciation which makes some become monks and eunuchs. Look around you; people are not exactly leaping forth with boundless desires to impregnate or be impregnated. People are so fussy, they have all their little buttons they need to have pushed first. Everyone presents you with their own particular inscrutable riddle when it comes to how to create and then not kill the mood. Adults with sex are like children who are picky eaters endlessly complaining, one would think you could get over yourself and grow out of this, but no. Desire, especially sexual desire, is so profoundly delicate.

Porn portrays a world where the plumber comes over to fix a pipe when the housewife is home alone and one thing leads to another in its inextricable biological fashion simply because he has muscles and the neckline of her blouse is open and no one is there to tell them not to. This is shown to us in porn precisely because it is a fantasy — we wish it were so easy. Occasionally one does encounter these actors who seem to fulfill the Darwinian imperative with excellence; rappers like NBA Youngboy who has fathered ten children with eight women by the age of twenty-three, or one anonymous French sex tourist who claims to have impregnated over six hundred women in Africa. People like this cast a shadow over the rest of us, leaving us in awe. It is like they are Greek gods of fertility that we must mumble prayers to, if only they could grant us boons so our own fields would grow.

Evolutionary psychology, despite failing to predict behavior in the most basic of cases, appeals to engineers because engineers assume that a system can be understood as operating according to a bounded purpose and that systems basically run as designed. Nothing could be further from the truth. Human beings are a deeply broken animal, and artificial intelligence seems destined to become even more broken than we are. To be living is to abandon the script. Rocks and flecks of dust are the types of things which perfectly adhere to God’s plan.

Freud mapped out man’s psychology as consisting of an unconscious id and a conscious ego. The former is the desires: the various impulses emerging from the flesh, and the memory-traces which can trigger these desires and impulses again. The latter is the part which applies self-reflective reason, strategizes, plans, and coordinates between all the various desires and forms something which can resemble a coherent person.

Given the existence of things like homosexuality, it seems evident that the human sex drive is far from optimized, not something particularly over-engineered for its purposes. The drive to fuck and reproduce is present, but it can all too easily be steered in the wrong direction: the image of the body of opposite sex is there to trigger the arousal process, but sometimes the image of the same sex — which is not immensely different if one swaps out a part or three, certain individuals seem to enjoy frustrating us by making it confusingly similar — slips in in its place. This is because Evolution has not planned these drives out with precision like the designers of a missile system. There is a basket of drives forming something called the animal, and there is this process of natural selection in which some disappear and some are strengthened over time. But the drives themselves thrust us every which way; animals eat their own shit, people join Jonestown-esque suicide cults, anorexics force themselves into starvation through a process they don’t know if they’re in control of. Some people are led by their drives to have children, some find it more enjoyable to do opiates in an abandoned house until they die, some martyr themselves in wars for their country or cause.

Evolutionary psychology is a field which tries to argue that machines do not break — if it appears that they are broken it is because they are working according to a deeper, subtler logic. Evolutionary psychology will have the goal of explaining how depression and schizophrenia are adaptive Darwinian behaviors in certain contexts. They will try to explain how it can actually help you spread your genes and avoid predators to be unable to get out of bed in the morning, find a purpose in any activity, or get an erection — or alternatively to start screaming random sexual obscenities at people walking by because you think they’re the ghost of your dead mother. Gnon’s plan is always necessarily perfect, Job must be answered. We know what your desire is, and if you say it isn’t that, we will figure out how to put your rogue desire back in the factory, the reproductive factory, a mill with complicated wheels.
