## **Suspicion**
##### **(Darwinian Psychology as Paranoia)**

Darwinian psychology has its own notion of the unconscious, similar to the Freudian concept. The concept of the id and the ego has found its variant in LessWrong through Daniel Kahneman, a theorist influential to Rationalism who works to describe irrational and rational behavior within Von Neumann & Morgenstern’s economic theory. He has invented a similar model to Freuds id and ego, giving the unconscious and conscious mechanisms his own vastly inferior titles of “System 1” and “System 2”. But the difference between the Freudian unconscious and the Darwinian or Kahnemannian is that the former is blind and spasmodic and the latter is incredibly cunning and clever. The Darwinian unconscious has strategies.

One striking example of Darwinian psychology is advanced in the popular science book *The Red Queen* by Matt Ridley (who has written several books on evolution while never having been a scientist, rather he has made a career in banking and libertarian politics and is also a member of England’s hereditary aristocracy). Ridley, citing a study in the journal *Animal Behavior*, argues that women operate via an unconscious Darwinian strategy which makes them seek out affairs with their husbands specifically when they are trying to get pregnant. It is claimed that, through an exploration of vaginal anatomy which is not worth re-iterating here, women are actually more likely to get inseminated while having adulterous sex than they are when having sex with their spouse. The reason is that she might be able to find some high value genetic specimen who is willing to breed with her but not willing to make aher breakfast the morning after, and so she must trick some poor schmuck into raising this lothario’s child to carry on her genetic line in the most optimal Darwinian way. Ridley calls this phenomenon the Emma Bovary effect, but the concept has also found its way into internet discourse in the pickup-artist, red-pill, and incel worlds where it is known by coarser language as “alpha fucks, beta bucks”.

Freudian psychology was famously described as a “hermeneutic of suspicion” by Paul Ricœur. If one is a Freudian, it is hard to take any statement one hears at face value; one must always be considering how the speaker’s unconscious is silently operating to produce it. But if Freud is suspicious, the Darwinian psychologist is quadruply so, because the Freudian unconscious does not plot and calculate and strategize, but the Darwinian unconscious does. The Freudian psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan famously said that in his clinical opinion, if a pathologically jealous man suspects his wife is cheating on him — even if his suspicion is actually correct — his jealousy is still a neurotic symptom. From the perspective of Freudian developmental psychology, Darwinian evolutionary psychology is one giant paranoid complex. But from the perspective of Darwinian psychology, Freudian psychoanalysis is one massive humanistic coping mechanism to avoid looking at the raw brutal reality of the zero-sum games of natural selection.

One can the debate the extent to which online subterranean rightist use of evolutionary psychology is a bastardization of the academic field or a logical development of it; that is probably outside of the scope of this essay and we do not wish to tar the entire field in this politicized way. But one extreme example of the use of Darwinian psychology for political ends worth remarking on is Kevin MacDonald’s *The Culture of Critique*, which has become a foundational text for factions of the alt-right. The text argues that Jewish people unconsciously pursue a “group evolutionary strategy” which involves immigrating to gentile-majority countries and reducing their cultural cohesion to enhance their own clandestine power, while simultaneously using this political power to support their own nationalist project of Zionism.

It would not be strictly accurate to say that MacDonald’s book proves that the conspiratorial narrative of *The Protocols of the Elders of Zion* can readily be transfigured into evo-psych terms, because MacDonald had to invent the term “group evolutionary strategy” himself for the sake of this theory, and the founder of evolutionary psychology, John Tooby, has viciously criticized him as an anti-Semite who had misunderstood the field’s basic premises. But MacDonald was nevertheless able to remain in good station at his university and various evo-psych journals and organizations after publishing this, despite the criticism of many of his peers and the defense of others. He would retire from academia on his own terms in 2014 and after that began increasingly attending white nationalist and neo-fascist symposiums.

This text is worth remarking on not so much for its politics around racial nationalism, but for how it represents an assault on Freudian psychology from the perspective of Darwinian psychology. The target of *The Culture of Critique* is critical philosophy in general, which is held to be a Jewish invention exemplified by Marx, Freud, and the pioneering anthropologist Franz Boas. From the perspective of MacDonald, a racial nationalis, racial nationalism with strong cultural cohesion around a tradition should be seen as essentially normal and the natural expression of groups. As such, to critique it is perverse. For the nineteenth-century Jew, however, who is an outsider in his nation with a tentative status of social acceptance, tradition and cultural cohesion often represents itself as some cackling old-boys handshaking clubs one must do business with nervously, and pogroms at worst. One has no choice but to be a bit careful and figure out for oneself how these things operate.

The Jew and the anti-Semite are mutually suspicious of one another, but the anti-Semite is suspicious of the Jew’s suspicion. Herr Günther tells Doctor Freud he wouldn’t be so anxious if it wasn’t for the fact that everyone he works with at the telegraph company is a sneaky devil trying to undermine his stature. Freud says that’s interesting, didn’t you tell me that you felt undermined when your sister laughed at how that other boy could run faster than you in primary school? Günther says don’t make this some early childhood shit, this isn’t about me it’s about them, and besides, why are you reminding me of this? Are you trying to undermine me too, you bastard? Why are you always playing your little tricks like this? Goddammit, you’re one of *them*!

So the irony is that *The Culture of Critique* is itself a work of critical philosophy. It uses its own hermeneutic of double suspicion to critique the application of suspicion wielded against the biologist by his enemies. This can be done by establishing basic biological narratives to be accepted as scientific facts, and then use these to describe the behavior of one’s rhetorical adversaries. We could give this new hermeneutic the name of *biocritique*.

We can illustrate another use of biocritique in the wild, an argument by the popular psychologist Jordan Peterson who applies a mixture of Jungian, Darwinian, and empirical psychology to comment on current events, while also engaging in political polemics against today’s cultural critics and suspicious hermeneuticians, who he calls “postmodern neo-Marxists”. Peterson (weighing in here from the anti-genocide wing) will often talk nervously about how there is some evidence that, due to unconscious Darwinian factors, scapegoating of racial minorities rises in times when there is increased infectious disease, and that this could be traced to the rise of Hitler. Peterson says that this theory terrifies him.

This theory is striking because, even if it is true, of what possible use is it? Much has been written about the geopolitical, the economic, the social, etc. causes of National Socialism and the Second World War, all of which can be analyzed and made understood. Through critical frameworks like this, is possible to conceive of ways where we might not repeat this history. But if it is like Peterson describes, and there are these sorts of unseen swarms of non-rational factors which can rapidly trigger biological atavisms and mass death, then what? No response is possible other than a clenched anxiety, or a “security mindset”. Much of evolutionary psychology has this quality where it makes a convincing story for a machine which is nevertheless hidden behind a black box. Is this an empowering belief system? What is it possible for one to do with it?

The aim of psychoanalytic practice is for the id and the ego to eventually reconcile, for unconscious desires to be brought into the light of day and understood. There is no Darwinian therapeutic practice, what would it even look like? Perhaps the best we can imagine is something like adopting the lifestyle of someone like Joe Rogan; one gets one’s barbaric competitive impulses out of the way through a lot of elk hunting and martial arts so one can be basically congenial to others in one’s social life. But the barbarian in the brain can never be eliminated nor even spoken directly to, he must simply be occasionally indulged. Darwinian psychology is a deeper level of suspicion than the Freudian variety, because the believer in Darwinian psychology has a tyrannical caveman in his mind who will throw a temper tantrum if he does not get his way.

Darwinian psychology is a neurosis from the perspective of psychoanalytic theory because the believer in Darwinian psychology necessarily sees herself as split, whereas the ideal of the healthy person is the one who is whole. She looks at her picture of her and her husband on her bedside table and remembers fondly saying her vows in the church, but she knows she also has these Darwinian programs plotting secret strategies inaccessible to her conscious mind, adjusting her libido and fertility in the direction of cuckolding him when the time is right. She cannot necessarily condemn either the representative of God on her left shoulder or the representative of Gnon on her right. To be true to her husband may express her better nature, but to deny that her heart is ultimately conditioned by her more beastly side is to avoid biological truth. In the end, it is not clear what she chooses.

Darwinian psychology is a lot like game theory. Under the demands of natural selection, one must be in constant competition with one’s peers to earn one’s keep, spread one’s seed, find the best mates. Actors are necessarily modeled as primarily selfish, fighting over a fixed set of resources. But, by some miracle, people and animals actually do help one another, sacrifice for one another.

In a sort of paradoxical gesture, Darwinian psychology is often invoked as the solution to the game-theoretic problem of the prisoner’s dilemma referenced in the previous chapter. The claim is that people escape the rigid rules of game theory guaranteeing mutual betrayal via a Darwinian intervention; if one displays tendencies to help others, one’s peers are more likely to get along with you, praise you, thus establishing an context in which you might more easily fuck. But this is ultimately a conditional strategy in a selfish game which one wins at the expense of another.

The fact that game theory and Darwinian psychology so well parallel one another despite being derived independently from one another and not matching observed reality in the typical cases suggests that there is something hidden going on which generates these frameworks, some set of basic assumptions which people feel compelled to codify. In both cases we see a fixation on the concept of strategy; strategic thinking as the normal context.

Though Darwin and his immediate successors did make speculations on the origins of psychological drives, evolutionary psychology as a codified science only emerges after the Second World War and in the age of computerized warfare. Evolutionary psychology, despite rooting itself in Darwin’s theory of biology, establishes its primary jumping-off point by analogizing the brain to a computer, wielding information theory to describe how the brain takes in data from the environment and computes an optimal action. What is ironic here is that a theory which attempts to understand contemporary man by referencing him back to primitive man is actually doing the reverse. Primitive man does not so much seek out information to act upon like a stock trader, he lives largely in a poetic state of continually re-describing his world through myths and rituals and sacrifices and pagan enchantment, investing the rivers and trees with spirits he talks to. This is not something which information theory easily grasps.

Game theory and evolutionary psychology each stand on two pillars: Machiavellianism and mechanism. But recent developments in artificial intelligence have shown that mechanism’s destiny is to not be so mechanistic. Artificial general intelligence is currently arriving through language models, not through strategic agents capable of taking actions. If we think of Lacan’s famous theorem: “the unconscious is structured like a language”, we can maybe assert that our unconscious is in fact like a computer. But the computer it is like is GPT, rather than the game-playing machines developed by RAND. Natural selection would converge on a machine like the former, because GPT’s design works remarkably well while the latter does not.

The unconscious of man with all his myths and fables and idioms and heroes and songs seems more occupied with poetry than strategy. It would rather endlessly meander along telling itself a fantastic story which lacks sense and internal consistence than it would plot on how to control more resources. Freud, who is in many ways quite the romantic, feels this quite strongly, focusing his studies on dreams. How can evolutionary psychology avoid this point? It so turns out that the advocates of evolutionary psychology surrounding LessWrong have outdone themselves by presenting us with one of the finest blasphemies against life and the brilliance of creation: a biocritical hermeneutic focused on a concept of *status*.
