## Status
##### **(The Dangers of Hanson’s Framings and Their Popularization)**

This idea of Status has been advanced by Robin Hanson, who co-founded LessWrong with Yudkowsky. The argument goes like this: humans, like other primates, live in societies which to a certain degree are hierarchical; some get priority over resources against others. One’s Status, one’s social status, is one’s ranking in this hierarchy. Everything hinges on this because it also determines who you get to fuck. Thus it is extremely important from a Darwinian perspective that you hatch your best plot to raise your Status against others, something which takes a great degree of cunning and conniving, but it is also important that you deny and disavow that you are doing this so you cannot be called out for it. Man’s essential state is *Mean Girls*.

Hanson has written a book, *The Elephant in the Brain*, where he describes the Darwinian unconscious as this enormous yet unseen “elephant” which schemes, strategizes, and lies to acquire Status for selfish ends, yet is invisible to its host. Hanson applies this as a hermeneutic of suspicion to assign deceptive motives across various domains of life; casual conversation, religion, politics, healthcare, art. Much of what humans do is a petty game around assigning Status. The Rationalists consider themselves unique for being able to spot this and describe it, to a certain extent even suspend participation in it (to write one’s philosophy in the form of a Harry Potter fanfiction of about half a million words is not really the action of someone looking for Status in a conventional sense), and this supplies a narrative for their own exceptional status as a community.

But it is not clear if this makes them more virtuous, because the Darwinian psychologist has no choice but to be a self-conscious sinner. One can not entirely avoid one’s own nature, so one is forced to occasionally play Status games oneself as a treat, or at the very least heavily invest in uncovering Status politics in one’s social life from a defensive perspective.

It is like how Rationalists bemoan “tribalism” in modern life and politics, yet form an insular tribe themselves with their subculture. The biocritical angle is useful to provide a justification for one’s lack of engagement with the rest of the world. The Rationalist can claim he does not lose out from being cut off from the philosophical tradition at large and clinging to a small canon of blogs and books and fanfictions, because most of the humanities are about Status, not reason. No one would actually suffer through all of Heidegger’s drivel if he didn’t think it would help him get laid or get tenure somehow, one might claim.

Biocritique is also the most frequent response Yudkowsky has for his critics. He believes that humans have a natural Darwinian drive towards “status regulation”, which means that if someone like himself who lacks academic qualifications or other agreed-upon indicators of social Status speaks too confidently or acts too boldly, people will respond instinctively with rage, feeling that he needs to be put back into his rightful place.

What is so bold about this theory is that it takes the inclination of Von Neumann and Morgenstern to describe man as a strategic economic agent and extends it to all of his actions that have nothing to do with acquiring actual resources. There is not just the primary economy of money and exchange for goods, but there is this second, hidden economy of the fluctuations of Status. It is said of one’s Status that it is something one “optimizes” for, so it must, according to this mathematical framing, be something possible to model as a single variable. How these variables can be quantified, communicated, and known are not clear, but it must somehow in this metaphor be getting computed unseen in the collective Darwinian unconscious, which must somehow be like the blockchain, updating and broadcasting the changes to everyone’s Status in real time on the peer-to-peer network.

Hanson contrasts the irrational Status-optimizing behavior others are immersed in with the ideals of Rationalism he aspires to, but then makes it clear that Status-seeking is also rational. The Darwinian machine always works as intended and never runs off course. When people abandon resource acquisition and start making paintings, giving away their resources to charity, becoming obsessed with religion and other things outside this world, this is also secretly about resource acquisition as well. The calculations never cease.

What is interesting is how today, due in part to artificial intelligence, we now do in fact have something like this second economy of Status which is actually physically real. There is this whole clout economy based around social media likes, followers, views, stored in enormous distributed systems. Everyone knows exactly where everyone stands and no one has to guess, like Kanye West said “it’s like if you had to have your net worth or the size of your dick written on your t-shirt”. But even so, the quantification can only capture so much, there is this slippage between algorithmic clout and the aura of Status. One can have low-quality followers, even bots. One can keep one’s follower count deliberately low, like a band who doesn’t want to sell too many records because they’d rather keep the mystique of being underground. It’s cool to be connected to the things no one else has heard of. It’s less of a flex to have ten thousand followers than it is to know about and follow Kanye’s secret alt.

Of course we are not denying these truths: that human societies are quite hierarchical, that there are some people we must defer to, that there are some people who seek fame and power and admiration at the expense of all else, that people are usually vain and insincere, that there are shot-callers and bottom-feeders and people largely know who is who.

But Status is not an economy or a calculation or something which can be measured and thus optimized, it’s an endless series of contexts which shift and slip with each syllable. A better model of how Status works is in the book *Impro* by Keith Johnstone, where the author, a theater director, describes how in improvisational games, one must choose to lead and one must follow. This basically parallels all human social activity; typically for two people to coordinate one has to lead the other. Exceptions to this are found in transcendent states, maybe occurring in something like ecstatic dance. But even with two people the hierarchy is never stable: plays like *Waiting for Godot* work on a principle of comedic Status inversion that allows a servant to mock at his master like a jester to a king.

Also, leading is not necessarily desirable, it’s a bit of a burden to have to lead; when couples try to go out to a restaurant they always want the other one to have to choose. In both heterosexual and homosexual contexts it has been found that most people prefer to play submissive roles in sex, leading to an awkward situation where there are not enough doms to go around. Whether this points to a deeper masochistic nature in man or if most people are simply lazy and would rather play the role which requires less exertion, who knows.

The lie of Status is that people’s investments in others form solely because they are trying to maximize some hidden resource which will allow them to reproduce. But people’s desires are not bound by what allows them to reproduce; people do not think much about reproduction. Rather, it is possible for people to desire anything at all, and they value relationships with people who possess these things. Money, political power, humor, good looks, charm, resources, connections, talent, ability to show a good time.

In a situation where man is free, people bravely chase these myriad ends and return to their peers eager to show themselves off as someone who can hunt the stag. This produces the endless creativity of the species. But there are degenerate cases in which people are forced by another into closed environments in which there are no external objects of value to chase: high schools, prisons, failing or poorly-structured companies. At this point, Mean Girls is likely to occur, as there is no way to establish yourself as leader of the pack among your peers and thus more frequently get your way other than petty cruelty and emotional terrorism. Most of the studies on primates which establish the parallel between human behavior and that of apes are done on zoo animals in captivity.

It is necessary to overturn Status so that we can remember our essential freedom; we are not enslaved to a Darwinian jailer in our minds. The Darwinian psychologist is suspicious of art which does not follow the rules; he finds it hard to imagine that people are actually capable of enjoying Rothko or Schoenberg. These do not reflect a concept of beauty which would have served man’s instincts in the savannah, the posturing art-world hacks only pretend to enjoy it for Status. But the connoisseur of avant-garde art enjoys it precisely for that reason, that it shows how beauty can exist totally beyond all rules and recognizable forms, and the quest to discover and capture it can never end.