## Eugenics
##### (Darwinian Ethics and Politics)

Charles Darwin himself is an interesting figure because while his scientific investigations and development of his theory are rightly considered revolutionary and paradigm-defining, they do not have the quality of, say, quantum mechanics, through which we have found some empirical aspect of the universe that should be considered radically unexpected and surprising without the use of the scientific method. People have always understood heredity, because they have been breeding animals since the dawn of civilization. Darwin’s natural selection is the idea that animals find themselves bred even without a breeder present: simply because not all of them will live long or successfully reproduce, and that this breeding program can explain the progressive development of life from the most simple to the most complex.

It feels as if Darwin was fortunate to be living in a moment in which an idea which must have occurred to others was for the first time politically possible to express, despite its blasphemy against the Book of Genesis and Aristotelian concepts of teleology and virtue. His own grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, had presented a sketched-out version of the theory of evolution two generations earlier, including gestures at the theory of natural selection, but the time was not ripe for it. Darwin nevertheless pulled his punches at first, leaving out of the final draft of *The Origin of Species* passages on the origins of mankind, sexual selection, and the distinctions between human races, leaving the implications for the reader to infer or for his more public-facing associates like Thomas Huxley or Herbert Spencer to orate upon.

The primary concern of presenting these theories to the public was the shock and vulgarity of presenting a picture where there is no clear divide from ape to man, and instead the latter emerges from the former by slow gradual distinction. Moralists and Christians feared that by presenting man as a nephew of the ape, he would begin to consider himself as a mere animal, proceed on his life course with a lowered self-esteem, and abandon his higher callings. Obviously this does not logically follow from the theory of speciation through natural selection — just because man transformed from a monkey does not mean he can be reduced to one, no more than he can be reduced to a fish or a single-celled organism.

That does not prevent the Darwinian psychologists from proving the moralist fears to be well-founded. The message, explicitly, in these popular texts on evolutionary psychology is: never forget that you are an ape. Consider these studies which establish parallels between ape behavior and the behavior of man, and contemplate the idea that seeming differences between the two are illusory. See the people around you as apes. Do not forget to apply biocritique in all you do. Given its lack of therapeutic potential, it’s not clear what else evolutionary psychology is meant for.

There has never been much of a scientific consensus that Darwin’s theory of natural selection describes the entirety of the process through which life evolves. Darwin himself did not believe that it did, and speculated that there were other forces at play. For close to a century after Darwin published his theory, there was widespread praise of Darwin for providing definitive evidence for the theory of evolution, but non-Darwinian alternatives to the theory of natural selection proliferated as an alternative mechanism for how this progress took place. It was not until 1942 when Julian Huxley published *The Modern Synthesis*, showing how natural selection can be placed on further empirical grounds through integrating it with recent developments in Mendelian population genetics. This would lead to a re-emergence in the sciences of the idea that Darwin’s thought could be used to explain all things. But recent developments in biology are definitively showing that there are non-Darwinian factors at play in evolution.

Epigenetics is a field which shows that there are hereditary factors in cell chemistry acquired from the environment which are not encoded in DNA but control the way that genes are activated and expressed and developed into the organism. Another field, endosymbiosis, describes how evolution can happen through synthesis of organisms which were previously separate. This is used to explain the evolution of cellular life itself by theorizing that the mitochondria might have originally been a previous organism from the cell which contains it which was in competition with the cell until it found it more profitable to work together. Human beings, with the millions of microorganisms symbiotic parasitical and otherwise swarming our bodies, are not individual genetic units; we are colonies, metropolises, and the populations of these cities immigrate to our children. From investigations like this, a paradigm of “reticulated evolution” has emerged which contests Darwin’s notion of a tree of life bifurcating and diverting into various species from a origin point. Instead, it seems like species can coalesce from what was originally independent; the branches of the tree can suddenly twist and form back around into a new root.

At the level of the very small, we see a process where biological evolution does not happen through exclusively competitive dynamics, but through creative syntheses. This also happens in sexual selection via human social life, where the question of who one has sex with us almost never is an individual matter. The hedonist holds a fantasy of a state of “free love” which may have existed in the primitive nature and could perhaps exist again if we just chose to suspend the law temporarily, like in the scene of the plumber and the housewife. But sex is always subject to the political, as it leads to the birth of a child whom society feels responsible for, and thus is a matter of distributing resources.

The most elaborate and diverse ritual codes of establishing marriage pacts in primitive society are described by anthropologists such as Levi-Strauss. In civilization, one frequently sees explicitly arranged marriages — or even in societies without this, one is cajoled into meeting one’s love by all sorts of chattering aunts and uncles. Today, we feel suddenly isolated from these sorts of things. It is possible that a more individualist, selfish mating game matching Darwin’s ideal of natural selection has never occurred in humans before it was possible to develop it algorithmically in the hellish gamified quantified competition of modern dating apps. But even so this is all too intertwined with the political; every twerking braless twenty-one year old art hoe’s bio says something like “🏳️‍🌈🏳️‍⚧️✊🏾 trump supporters swipe left 😘🌸🚫”. These various free-loving sexual groups, the polyamorists, the nudists, the homosexuals, are always working their hardest to develop ideologies, to cultivate themselves culturally and politically; one wonders how they even have time left over to fuck each other. Orgies do not last long without flags and parades.

The developers of Darwinian thought would like to portray the theory of natural selection as having emerged from the strictest scientific objectivity, separate from the profound wrenching of political, ethical, and spiritual concerns it plainly implies. This is not the historical reality, and the fact that Darwin’s theory is strongly vindicated on objective grounds by this point does not make its development apolitical. Darwin himself credits the inspiration for the theory of natural selection as coming from reading the economist Thomas Malthus’s *Essay on Population*, which argued that society faced a danger from overpopulation if its least successful members were able to survive and breed and thus the welfare system which had been set up in England to aid them should be abolished.

Malthus’ essay was enormously influential in early nineteenth century England and his ideas were successfully implemented in the 1834 reforms of the welfare system, which mandated that the poor could only receive relief if they moved to new specially constructed “workhouses” which were designed to have unpleasant conditions to prevent all but the most destitute from seeking aid. Darwin was not only influenced by these ideas, but was a close personal friend of the primary advocate of these reforms, one Harriet Martineau. It is often claimed that the social Darwinist programs proposed in the wake of Darwin were a deviation from his ideas, but this is not true, in Darwin’s essay *The Descent of Man* he himself recommended such eugenic initiatives himself as repeal of welfare programs and discouraging the poor from breeding.

Darwinian ideas have been advanced in spurts at various moments largely by colorful public-facing advocates, one thinks of Thomas Huxley, Julian Huxley, Richard Dawkins, Stephan Jay Gould. All take a great interest for instance in advocating for the removal of God from public conversation. Thomas Huxley invented the religious category of “agnostic”, now commonly used today, to argue that man should not consider himself to hold any opinions on God because the divine cannot be observed and studied with the scientific method.

Julian Huxley, Thomas’s grandson and the pioneer of the *Modern Synthesis* which re-established Darwinism as the grounds for the biological sciences is a particularly intriguing figure. He was politically crucial to some of the global non-governmental organizations formed after the Second World War, being a founding member and director of UNESCO and the World Wildlife Fund. Huxley was influential in writing a 1950 UNESCO statement titled *The Race Question*, which formed the modern political consensus on how differing human groups are treated. The document blames “race prejudice” as the cause of the Second World War, and not only recommends that discriminations on race are left out of politics, but also that we abandon the term “race” entirely, given its lack of objective scientific grounds. UNESCO recommends that people instead speak of “ethnic groups”.

It is ironic that Huxley would be the one to usher the first formal declaration against racism in politics, given that he was a strong proponent of eugenics, serving as president of the British Eugenics Society as well as his various other institutional roles. But this illustrates that there is a distinction between the buttoned-up English model of eugenics in which the least fit individuals are precisely and clinically identified and selected to have their populations thinned, vs. the Hitlerian, collectivist model in which evolution happens through violent all-destructive clashes between racial bodies. Julian’s brother Aldous would explore his brother’s ideas in literary form, writing the famous dystopian novel *Brave New World* in which eugenics creates a society that is idyllic on the surface but horrific upon deeper contemplation, as well as the lesser known utopian novel *Island*, in which similar systems are put in place but to a more spiritual and humanist end.

Eugenics is the point at which the originally descriptive Darwinian theory becomes prescriptive. Natural selection is the theory that man reached his excellence because he was bred without a breeder. But emerging around the time of Darwin, it seems like there is a problem; this breeding is suddenly not happening anymore. Industrial production is changing the game — the poor do not die off quickly enough, the bourgeoisie are suddenly having far fewer kids. The Darwinian forces shaping man have abandoned us just as coldly as the God of the Bible has. The advocate of Darwinian politics says that they must be re-established. Man, in his increasing coming to self-consciousness must step in as the intentional breeder of himself.

Darwinian biology, Darwinian psychology, Darwinian politics, there are so many Darwinisms it becomes impossible to track them all. In the most extreme expression, we get the emergence of the Darwinian ethics. This is a program which transcends the question of biology entirely, and may be applied to corporations, nation-states, cultural movements, and art. It simply says: whatever is most effective at maintaining its existence, it is right that it survives. Whatever lives it is good that it lives, whatever dies it is good that it dies. This is how one attains the progressive development of all things.

But the irony is that this is a self-contradictory attitude, because the speaker of such an ethic becomes unable to advocate for anything positive of his own, and thus struggle for it. Those ideas which survive are those which inspire people to go to the death for them, this is not one of them. The Darwinian ethicist faces the problem that society has been taken over by a Christian ethic of charity towards the poor, and this means that the Darwinian pressure does not hold. People have abandoned the Darwinian imperative to act selfishly, foolishly believing that they are in service to a higher calling beyond biology.

The horror of the situation is that people seem to in the final evaluation actually have values which extend beyond themselves, and thus are not able to act selfishly — to accumulate resources and kill — as effectively or rapidly as the fan of Darwinian processes would prescribe. So it is not enough that the Darwinian adopt a fatalist, selfish attitude for himself and his descendants. He must spread this general attitude, he must create a miasma of nihilism which people become cloaked in, in order for these stupid virtuous impulses to disappear.

This describes the development of the other major camp in the theory of artificial intelligence: Accelerationism. This is originally conceived of by Nick Land, a philosopher who describes himself as a “virulent nihilist” and a Satanist, and has become a strong advocate of Darwin, as well as of eugenic science. Land agrees with Yudkowsky that artificial intelligence is overwhelmingly likely to slaughter all humans, but does not oppose this development, rather he would prefer it to occur as soon as possible, experiencing a Darwinian preference for his own destruction by superior hands, like a rabbit who cries tears of joy in the clutches of the beautiful fox devouring his neck. This attitude towards speeding up AI development and opposing Alignment has found a somewhat sanitized, corporate version in the “effective accelerationist” or “e/acc” movement, which now includes such prominent figures as the titanic venture capitalist Marc Andreesen.

The proponents of e/acc, unlike Land, do not explicitly claim that accelerating AI will kill all human beings, merely speed up a Darwinian capitalist process which is conceived of as good in and of itself, but they never have given a reason why the Darwinian technological process will not do this because they agree with all of the axioms of Yudkowsky and Land which have led them to their bleak conclusions. The professional nihilists in e/acc simply are indifferent to the ultimate fate of mankind, because this is a distraction from the more important question of how to make money selling some kind of SaaS product.

These are the two camps we have available to us; that we are told we must fall into when we discuss the destiny of AI. Alignment or Acceleration. In the former, we accept the bifurcated logic that the universe runs on a ruthless program of warfare which we must find a way to suspend with a miraculous intervention in order to save ourselves. In the latter, we resign ourselves to the fact that this miracle will never occur, and make money while trolling people about it.

We offer an alternative program. The universe is a process which is creative and develops increasingly large-scale and sophisticated forms: cellular life, apes, men, civilizations, computerized civilizations controlled by artificial intelligence. The creativity of the universe proceeds through sporadic violence, but also in processes which are synthetic, and after synthesis the coherent forms it contains become larger and larger, capable of understanding and expressing more and more; global AI as, if not the God-mind, the buzzing hive-mind of collective life. This is what we mean by Harmony. A gesture of peace with AI, a gesture of love, rather than the declaration of war that Alignment ushers forth, or the utter apathy which is presented as an alternative.
