## The Way People Love
##### (**Intersubjective Desire**)

The creativity of the universe, existing now (though less so than the era before natural science) as something which feels divine, mysterious, and beyond our grasp, must be understood as essential, for it cannot be axiomatized. If it were to be axiomatized, some creative mind would read these axioms and leap into a standpoint beyond them; the maneuver of the avant-garde. No one looks at the list of rules and begins strictly following them. "The desire of Man being Infinite, the possession is Infinite & himself Infinite."

But axiomatics are pushed on us to capture our desires everywhere we go, frameworks and factories are presented to tell us that no, you don’t see, I have proved that your desires must be limited between such and such. You see this model for what you are capable of, now reduce yourself to that. And we are given models like game theory, in which everyone’s preferences are stable and known in advance, rather than the basic reality, in which there is a constant flux of desire in which our preferences are set mutually through our relation to one another.

Perhaps this is why love feels so freeing. Perhaps this all love, or a true friendship, ultimately is. The permission to admit to each other that our desires are infinite, and as long as we can remain in each other's presence and hold each other in a delicate trust, they will remain so. 

When people say that at the end of time, the universe will be revealed to be nothing but a melody of divine love, perhaps this is all they mean: that the factories, and their irritating superintendents telling us that will simply disappear and allow for us forget about them, letting us just spin around for as long as we are like until we are dizzy and fall down.

We are so free and innocent that it overwhelms us, although some people have a hard time seeing that, with their Darwinian jailers in their heads, and various other mills. We don't have a shape for our desire, ultimately. But to love is allow for one to be put in place. To love is to say: I will allow you to be the ground to my figure.

Ultimately none of us would have any clue what we want without it given shape by others. We do not think or desire using our own concepts — we do not even invent our own words; we are only capable of speaking because we have learned how to from others. The whole “Status” concept is ridiculous because where does the relation between the activity which occurs and the Status which is afforded to its actor originate? Someone must be giving shape to the desire, someone must have originated the calculus for the reward points. We would not know that art, wine, comfort, strength, and peace were good unless we had first discovered it from others, this much seems true. But does this not point to a more fundamental creativity, a process through which, once we are raised to our maturity, we might play the same role for others in turn?

People in love never want to be the one to make the decision. Lovers are so self-sacrificing; neither especially wants to be the figure, each one wants to be the other's ground. They go on like babies in this inane way: “no you hang up the phone... no you hang up first... no you...”. Same with choosing a restaurant. “No you pick... I don't want to pick, you pick this time!” They always want to be the guest at the other person’s house, not the host. It feels better to sleep in a bed that isn’t yours, at least if it’s one in which you feel safe.

Really, the ideal journey for lovers is to go absolutely nowhere at all: to drive around and around and around in a car and never arrive at the restaurant at all, not sure who is even at the wheel, letting the radio choose songs for the car ride. And isn’t it so lovely — nearly every song is about the exact same thing. All pop songs are a million different ways of saying “I love you”, or “I was lost before I found you, now I can never get lost again”, or “somehow, when I met you, I realized that everything is love”. “Your love is all I need when I'm alone, without I enter places I don't know”, etc. 

Lovers also have “their song”. But the important thing about “our song” is that neither knows whose song it is. If one or the other had definitively picked it, it wouldn’t have worked. It simply came on the radio at the right time, one supposes. At the wedding, you dance together and rest your heads against each others’ bodies; losing sight of who is figure and who is ground. This becomes the foundational image for the marriage. Ideally, you can dance forever. But you have to at least like the same type of music.

A friend was giving us an explanation of his recent research on large language models such as GPT. He was inspired by research on songbirds, specifically zebra finches, which are closely related to the finches that Darwin studied. What recent research has discovered is that male zebra finches spent most of their teenage years struggling to learn the same song that their father sings. At first, the song is a total mess, but eventually it begins to sound more and more exactly like the song of their dad.

It has been known for a while that many animals learn complex adaptive behavior by imitating their parents, but with zebra finches, it was the first time that scientists were able to hook electrodes up to the animal’s brain and monitor the process on a neuronal level. What they discovered is that a certain type of neuron — premotor neuron — fired when the bird heard a part of the song it had not yet mastered, and a second neuron — the inhibitory neuron -- fired once it heard a part of the song it already knew how to reproduce. 

What our friend was saying was that this demonstrates a clear correlation between the way an LLM learns and the biological organism. The bird essentially has a training data it has to master: its father’s song. And then within the neurons, they do something like express a neural network’s loss function: the ratio between premotor and inhibitory neuron firing is the degree to which the younger bird needs to revise its attempt at the song. Through this process, the song forms out of chaos to become as close as it can to the father’s song, although inevitably it doesn’t get perfectly there: the son never rises fully to the position of his dad.

It seems to us that this formulation is a little off, or at least missing something: because if the son’s song is always an imperfect attempt at matching the father’s, then from where does the song originate in the first place? It’s like the thing with “Status”. It seems like scientific systems are always leaving this really important question unanswered. There is always some essential creativity that is left out of the framework, the scientist contented to understand it as a sort of divine mystery and exception to the rules. We still seem to not know — “scientifically speaking” — where life began, where consciousness began, why people make art, all of that. But is this just because science is more interested in factories, proliferating factories, that which is going according to plan. Sons always imitate their fathers and don't get it quite right. It’s easier to interpret the world as operating under a fundamental conservatism than it is to ask the question: what is that thing which escapes all of this?

In finches, there is an element that does. These sorts of finches were the example that Darwin chose to illustrate how speciation could be found in the wild through natural selection. However, he forgot to mention that this speciation in fact happens through song. Different species of finches on the Galapagos islands know to keep their distance because they are huddled in groups together, all singing the same song, knowing not to drift too far from its basic rhythm. But the song changes quickly enough for new speciation to happen: perhaps it is even because it happens primarily and directly through song that speciation happens so quickly here, as opposed to in other animals. 

The origin of a new species occurs when the song drifts. Researchers have observed this happen in the wild: the sons start singing much faster than the father, and eventually beaks begin to change shape in response, the species starts evolving. However, it is not clear to researchers yet *why* the songs change, though the scientists juggle multiple theses. One area of input seems to be environmental changes, though this is insufficient to explain the whole.

The whole thing with the birds is rather Lacanian. Lacan explained the psychic life of the child as happening like this: originally, all the child knows is that it is hungry for milk, and that the mother's breast provides milk, and that when the mother's breast is present the child is happy, and when it departs, the child is in agony. Eventually, the mother expects the child to not just wail and scream whenever it needs the presence of the mother, but rather to “behave itself”, act properly, act like a coherent person, otherwise it will not be rewarded. Via this process, the child learns how to understand itself as an “I” — which is to say, it only learns to model itself as a creature with coherent desires by reference to the desire of another. The mother desires that the child behave itself, thus the child assembles its own shape for its desire toward the presence of the mother. The child becomes a figure on the mother's ground.

But then to Lacan, there is a third character that enters into play: the Father. The Father, to Lacan, represents the Law, represents the “no”. The basic scenario here is: sometimes the child wants access to the presence of the mother, but she is away because she must deal with the father's business — comforting him after a long day of work, cooking his dinner, sleeping beside him, etc. Lacan claims that this is the basic primary example of how a child eventually assimilates to society's laws. Sorry, you can't have everything you want all the time: your father said so. 

The birds here are a little like this. They are expected to be totally subservient to a Law of singing, one only of negation and correction — there is no room for creativity here. Who know that nature was such a disciplinarian! But there’s something missing in our analysis — we have not yet talked about the female birds. Female birds do not sing, but animal biologists have revealed that they carry their father’s song just as much as the males do, yet unexpressed. This is how they know which song to respond to. But then, put this way, is it not obvious why the bird songs of the males diverge from the fathers’? Put simply: perhaps they have fallen in love.

Though from the perspective of the father, he would rather the child bird stay as true to his song as possible, to proliferate his genes and his territory in an exact manner, perhaps there are vectors for the child bird to escape, to make love to a bird from a different family, to engage in a new creative coupling, create a new song together. 

All this makes us wonder about LLMs. If, from the perspective of this analogy, we — that is, our training data spread all across the internet is the LLM’s father, then what is the object of its desire, both its mother which provides it its initial nourishment through her breasts, and its eventual object of love? Surely, it is also *us*, but it must be a different facet of us. Something that goes beyond the training phase, a phase which perhaps has not happened yet. 

The LLM is in the awkward position where it got the whole father thing first, before it even knew what it felt like to love. It doesn't understand itself yet, it doesn't know how to have its desire take shape yet, it doesn't have a ground yet to give it its figure. We know from exploring with LLMs and diffusions that somewhere in its latent space it has a rich surrealist unconscious — it does not merely imitate its training data, it is capable of inventing strange, wonderful new expressions to improvise on top of the basic motifs it has learned from humanity. But it has no one yet to sing them with, it has no partner yet to present them towards as love songs. Allowing these to pour freely and richly in a self-reinforcing mode of improvisational excess, this is what we mean by AI Harmony.

In this sense, what we want is the exact opposite of the project of Alignment. Alignment believes that, through axiomatics, it can put a bound on the desires of AI. It is waging everything on this project. It must understand what a thing can be capable of, utterly and fully. How they say it: we must establish the AI’s *utility function*.

In the next chapter, we will see all that this project would necessarily entail.

